0.246	Sixth, sinners’ hatred is also cruel.
0.247	It is just as God says: they are “giving back hatred for his love.”
0.248	God is love. That is why they hate him, and it is the only reason.
0.249	Notice this: it is not because they overlook the fact that he is infinitely kind and good.
0.250	They do not just hate him for other reasons, in spite of this fact. They hate him because of this fact.
0.251	In the most literal and complete sense, they are paying back his love with hatred.
0.252	He is against their hurting each other.
0.253	He wants them to be happy. He is infinitely against their making themselves miserable.
0.254	Think of a parent on earth who could see ahead that his beloved child’s way of life would ruin the child. God is infinitely more against sinners doing anything that will harm themselves than that parent ever was against his child’s behavior.
0.255	His heart longs for them with a tenderness infinitely greater than any parent’s.
0.256	He pleads and reasons with sinners. He says, “Oh, do not do that disgusting thing that I hate.”
0.257	“How can I give you up, Ephraim?
0.258	How can I hand you over, Israel?
0.259	How can I make you like Admah?
0.260	How can I treat you like Zeboim?
0.261	My heart is turned over within me, and all my pity is burning.”
0.262	He feels all the tender love that pours out of a father’s heart. He also feels all of a father’s opposition to anything that will harm his children. Children sometimes hate and insult their parents for standing against the wayward paths that lead them to destruction. In the same way, sinners hate God more than they hate any other being, because he is infinitely more opposed to their destroying their own souls.
0.263	Seventh, the better God is, the more sinners hate him.
0.264	The better he is, the more he opposes their selfishness. And as long as they stay selfish, the more he opposes their selfishness, the angrier they get with him.
0.265	In my second sermon on depravity, I showed that people hate God more than anything else.
0.266	The only reason is that his excellence is the highest excellence there is.
0.267	His goodness is pure goodness, with nothing else mixed in. So their hatred is pure hostility, with nothing else mixed in.
0.268	If there were any flaw in his character, people would not hate him so much.
0.269	Suppose God were not perfectly good—in fact, infinitely good. Then people might not be totally depraved. I mean they might not be totally against his character. But his character has no flaw at all. That is why they hate him sincerely, wholeheartedly, and perfectly.
0.270	Eighth, as long as sinners refuse to repent, the more God tries to do them good, the more they will hate him.
0.271	Think of all God does while they hold on to their selfishness. He works to hold it back, to fence them in, and to keep them from getting what their selfish desires want. He steps in to tear away their idols and to wean them from the world. He makes bitter every cup of joy they try to satisfy themselves with. He uses more and more ways to win them back, to make them holy, and to save them. But if their selfishness stays unbroken, then the more he does all this, the more deeply and eternally they will hate him.
0.272	Ninth, sinners are infinitely to blame for acting this way, and it deserves eternal death.
0.273	It is impossible to imagine guilt deeper or more deserving of damnation than the guilt of sinners who live under the Gospel.
0.274	They sin in such special circumstances that their guilt is even worse than the guilt of devils.
0.275	Devils have broken the law, and so have you, sinners.
0.276	But devils never rejected the Gospel.
0.277	They are guilty of rebellion, and so are you.
0.278	But they have never rejected the offer of forgiveness. They have never, as it were, kicked away the offer of eternal life through the blood the Son of God shed to atone for sin.
0.279	Sinners, if you do not deserve eternal death, then I cannot imagine that any devil in hell deserves it.
0.280	And yet, strange as it sounds, sinners often talk as if it were doubtful whether they deserve to be damned.
0.281	Tenth, this subject makes it easy to see that saints and angels will be completely satisfied with God’s justice when he damns sinners.
0.282	They will never enjoy the misery of those who are damned. But they will take pleasure in seeing justice shown. They will be glad to see God’s insulted majesty and wounded honor defended. They will be glad for the respect that punishment will create for God’s law and character. They will see that the way God shows his justice is glorious. And they will shout “Hallelujah!” while “the smoke of their torment will rise forever and ever.”
