0.1	John 15:25. — “They hated me for no reason.”
0.2	Our Lord Jesus Christ spoke these words.
0.3	In my last two sermons, I spoke about total depravity—how completely sinful people are. In them I tried to prove that all sinners who have not turned from their sin hate God more than anything else.
0.4	I believe I proved this teaching beyond any argument by pointing to the facts. So now we face a very serious and important question. Why do sinners hate God?
0.5	If sinners have a good reason to hate God, then they are not to blame for it. But what if they have no good reason? What if they hate him when they should love him? Then their hostility toward God makes them very guilty.
0.6	As I speak about this subject, I plan to show three things:
0.7	First, what is not the reason they hate him.
0.8	Second, what the reason really is.
0.9	Third, that they hate him for the very reasons they should love him.
H:0.7	I. First, I will show what is not the reason sinners hate God.
0.10	First, it is not because God made them in such a way that they have a built-in dislike of him, as part of their body or their basic makeup.
0.11	Our text says that sinners have hated God without a cause.
0.12	This does not mean there is no reason at all why they hate him. It means there is no good reason.
0.13	Strictly speaking, their hatred does have a cause, because everything that happens must have some cause. But it has no fair and right cause.
0.14	Suppose God had made human beings so that they could not help hating their Maker. Then that would not only be a cause for hating him. It would be a fair cause.
0.15	Suppose God had built a natural dislike of himself into the very stuff a person is made of. Then that would be reason enough for the sinner to hate him. In fact, it would be a good reason for every other being to hate him too.
0.16	Second, the sinner’s hatred of God is not caused by some leaning toward hating him that is inherited or passed down from parents.
0.17	Being inclined to hate God is already hatred.
0.18	An inclination like this is something the mind does. It is not a part of the mind itself.
0.19	So it makes no sense to talk about inheriting an inclination to love or hate God, or anything else, or having it passed down to us.
0.20	A state of mind that we choose cannot be inherited. It cannot be handed down from one generation to the next.
0.21	But some of you may mean something else by “inclination.” You may mean a tendency or temper that is not an action, and so not a state of mind we choose. You may mean a quality or feature that is part of the mind itself. If so, I say this:
0.22	Third, the sinner’s hatred is not caused by any such feature that is part of the mind and that, all by itself, naturally and unavoidably dislikes God.
0.23	Fourth, there is nothing in the way our nature is made that gives us a fair reason to oppose God.
0.24	Human nature is just as it should be.
0.25	Its abilities are just the way God made them.
0.26	He made them in the best way that his unlimited power, goodness, and wisdom could make them.
0.27	They are perfectly fitted for serving the One who made us. Look at all the amazing workings and delicate design of the body. Study all the qualities, powers, and abilities of the mind. We can find no fair reason to complain. Instead, we find endless reasons to love and worship the great Designer, and to cry out with the psalm writer, “I am made in an awesome and wonderful way.”
0.28	Fifth, the sinner has no fair reason to hate God because of the wise and kind plan by which all people come from one common ancestor. Under this plan from God, we are naturally influenced (but not forced) by the circumstances we live in, and those circumstances shape our characters.
0.29	We are made so that we naturally influence each other. We play a big part in shaping each other’s character. This is a wise and kind arrangement, and it is extremely important for the whole universe. But like every other good thing, it can be badly misused. The more power we have to encourage goodness when we do right, the more power we have to encourage evil when we do wrong.
0.30	Sixth, the sinner has no reason to hate God because of the way God rules people through his moral law.
0.31	His commands are not hard and heavy. They are not impossible to obey. They are not designed to make us miserable when we obey them. Just the opposite: “his yoke is easy to carry, and his load is light.”
0.32	His commands are easy to obey, and obeying them naturally leads to happiness.
0.33	Suppose God had set up a government that demanded so much that it was extremely hard to obey his laws. Suppose his laws were so unclear, complicated, and hard to understand that even an honest person could easily get wrong what he really wanted. Or suppose his laws were random, pointless, and based on whims. Or suppose they were backed up by unfair and cruel punishments. If any of these things were true, sinners would have a fair reason to hate God.
0.34	But not one of these things is true.
0.35	Also, sinners have no fair reason to hate God because of what the Gospel asks of them.
0.36	Suppose the conditions for salvation offered in the Gospel were random, based on whims, or unfair. Suppose it were impossible to meet them. Suppose the terms were set so high that people did not have the natural ability to obey them and meet the conditions their salvation depends on. Suppose God commanded people to repent when they had no power to repent. Suppose he required them to believe when they had no power to believe, and then threatened to send them to hell for not repenting and believing. In any of these cases, and in all of them, sinners would have a fair reason to hate God.
0.37	But none of this is true.
0.38	The conditions of the Gospel are not random at all. By their very nature, no one can be saved without them. And they are not set so high that they are impossible or even hard to meet. They have been brought down as low as they can possibly go without making the sinner’s salvation impossible.
0.39	Repentance and faith are absolutely needed to prepare the soul to enjoy heaven. If God dropped these conditions and agreed to let the sinner stay in his sins, that would make it certain that the sinner is damned.
0.40	Also, the conditions of salvation are not only necessary by their very nature. They are also easy to meet.
0.41	It is much easier to meet them than to reject them.
0.42	Our minds are just as able to accept the Gospel as to reject it.
0.43	The reasons to accept God’s offer of mercy are infinitely greater than the reasons to reject it.
0.44	In fact, the reasons to meet the Gospel’s conditions are so strong that sinners often find them hard to resist. They have to work almost nonstop to keep themselves from repenting and believing.
0.45	Also, there is no fair reason to hate God because of the way he guides and controls what happens in the world.
0.46	There is no reason to doubt that God guides the events of the world in the way that, overall, does the most good possible to encourage holiness.
0.47	It is clear that his moral laws are backed up by the strongest possible rewards and penalties. Everything a perfect moral government could do to make the whole world holy has been done.
0.48	In the same way, it is true beyond all reasonable doubt that he runs the physical world and all its events in the wisest possible way.
0.49	No doubt he runs it only to help and support his moral government.
0.50	It is set up to have the greatest moral influence that such a government can possibly have.
0.51	Many sinners talk as if God could have run both of his governments, the moral one and the one over events, much more wisely. They think he could have done it in a way far better suited to make his subjects behave perfectly.
0.52	They seem to think that because God is all-powerful, he can do anything you can imagine, even things that are absurd or that contradict themselves.
0.53	They think he can make moral beings perfect just by using his physical power. They also think the fact that sin exists in our world proves something. It proves, they say, that although God is against sin in some ways, overall he would rather have sin than holiness in its place.
0.54	They seem to assume that God could have run his two governments over the universe, moral and physical, in a way that would make everyone everywhere holy. But this idea has no basis at all, and it is a very wicked thing to assume.
0.55	You cannot fairly draw this conclusion from the fact that God is all-powerful and all-knowing. This idea is based on a wrong view of what it means to be a moral being who makes choices, and of what moral government is.
0.56	Also, there is nothing in God’s character that gives a fair reason to hate him.
0.57	However you look at the character of Jehovah, you will find nothing hateful or offensive to any fair-minded person.
0.58	Just the opposite: his character includes every good quality anyone could imagine, every good quality that could possibly exist.
0.59	Also, there is no fair reason to hate God because of the way he acts.
0.60	What he does always matches what he says.
0.61	Some people seem to picture God as sly, tricky, and two-faced. They picture him saying one thing and meaning another. They think he claims to hate sin, yet runs himself and his kingdom in a way that is sure to produce sin, and on purpose. They think he commands people to keep his law or face eternal death, but in the end would rather they break it. They think he commands everyone to repent and believe the Gospel, yet made atonement only for the elect, the ones he chose. They think he requires people to repent, yet made them in such a way that he knows they cannot repent. They think he says he wants very much for everyone to be saved, and yet has made their salvation depend on conditions no one can meet.
0.62	In fact, many seem to describe what God does and what God says as always at war with each other. They make it all into a tangled web of contradictions, nonsense, and hypocrisy.
0.63	But every description like this is a slander against the way he acts, which is infinitely fair and honest.
0.64	Also, God does nothing unkind or needlessly harsh to the people of this world.
0.65	Sinners have complained a lot about the way God acts. They have often said he treats them unfairly. Sometimes they have asked what they did to deserve such harsh punishment from him.
0.66	But all this complaining only proves how stubborn and twisted they are. It can never give anyone a fair reason to suspect that God has done wrong.
0.67	II. Sinners really do hate God because selfishness rules them above everything else. And God, as he should be, is infinitely against the thing they chase above all else.
0.68	The first thing we see in the behavior of little children is the desire to please themselves.
0.69	We cannot say at what point in their lives this desire turns into selfishness.
0.70	It is clear that it is not sinful to have a proper desire to satisfy our hunger and thirst, and all the other natural appetites we are made with.
0.71	These appetites are neither good nor bad in themselves. Satisfying them in the right way is not sinful.
0.72	But sometimes we satisfy them too much. Sometimes satisfying our appetites clashes with what God requires. Whenever and wherever we give in to our natural desires when we are supposed to hold back, we sin in every such case. That is because in all these cases we are selfish. We make our own pleasure the rule for what we ought to do, instead of what God requires.
0.73	We agree to please ourselves at the cost of everyone else, in a way that goes against God’s glory and the highest good of his universe.
0.74	This is what all sin really is, and this is the story of all sin.
0.75	At some point in our lives, we first choose pleasing ourselves over our duty to God. We first make pleasing ourselves the thing we choose above everything else. At some moment, pleasing ourselves becomes the rule that controls how we act and the highest goal of our lives. But it is probably impossible for us to know exactly when that happens.
0.76	But whenever it happens, that is where our depravity begins.
0.77	It is our first moral choice.
0.78	It gives us our first moral character.
0.79	Nothing that came before it was morally good or bad at all.
0.80	The Bible tells us this happens so early in our lives that it can be said, “The wicked turn away from God from the womb;
0.81	they wander off as soon as they are born, telling lies.”
0.82	Of course, we should not take these words literally, because we cannot talk at all when we are first born. But the wicked tell lies as soon as they can talk.
0.83	The psalm writer says, “Look, I was formed in wickedness, and my mother conceived me in sin.”
0.84	These words are also clearly a figure of speech. After all, the actual material of an unborn baby cannot possibly be sin!
0.85	That would go against God’s own definition of sin.
0.86	He says, “sin is breaking the law.” But the law gives us a rule for how to act. It is not a rule about what we are made of.
0.87	If the material of an unborn child is sin, if the child itself is a sin before it is born, then God is the one who committed that sin.
0.88	This verse and others like it can mean only one thing, unless we want to turn God’s word into complete nonsense and set different passages against each other forever. They mean that we have been sinners from the very start of our life as moral beings, from the first moment we began making moral choices.
0.89	Insisting that passages like these must be taken literally is the most dangerous way to twist the Bible.
0.90	Take the rule that says these passages must be read literally, and use it to explain the whole Bible. Then you will prove not only that sin and holiness are physical substances, but also that God is made of physical matter.
0.91	In fact, this has been the great mistake people have made about depravity.
0.92	There is an important rule for understanding language: words must be understood according to the kind of thing they are describing. People have ignored this rule. They have often given a word the same meaning whether it was used about physical things or about the mind.
0.93	For example, God defines sin as nothing but breaking the law. Some people set this definition aside. Instead they bring in figures of speech which, if God’s own definition does not explain them, might seem to say that sin is something other than choosing to break the law. Doing this makes Scripture contradict itself in a way that can never be fixed. It ignores one of the most important rules for understanding the Bible.
0.94	It is playing games with God’s word.
0.95	It is putting the Holy Spirit to the test.
0.96	It is a foolish twisting of God’s truth, if not a deliberate one.
0.97	So the main reason sinners are against God is not that something is wrong with their nature that forces them to oppose him. It is because he will never make peace with their selfishness.
0.98	He is infinitely against the main goal they are chasing. That goal is to get happiness for themselves in a way that goes against HIS glory and the happiness of others.
0.99	Their highest goal is to increase their own happiness in a way that goes against the good of everyone.
0.100	God is infinitely against this.
0.101	Since their goal is unholy, the ways they use to reach it are, of course, just as wicked as the goal.
0.102	So God is just as much against the ways they use as he is against the goal they are trying to reach by them.
0.103	These ways make up the whole story of their lives.
0.104	All of them are meant, directly or indirectly, to reach the one goal that fills the sinner’s whole mind: making himself happy.
0.105	So God is against everything they do or say as long as they refuse to repent. He is against it sincerely, with a clear conscience, and without limit, just as he should be.
0.106	They want to make everything serve their own private interests.
0.107	God insists that they look for their happiness in a way that fits with the happiness of everyone and helps to increase it.
0.108	After all, because of the way things really are, this is the only way they can ever be happy.
0.109	So he sets his whole heart on defeating every attempt they make to find happiness their own way.
0.110	He will always be the enemy of all their selfish plans.
0.111	He makes every cup of selfish joy taste bitter. He “throws their” selfish “plans into confusion, and brings their violence back down on their own heads.”
0.112	So you see that sinners hate God because he is so holy.
0.113	As long as they stay selfish, and he is infinitely loving and kind, their characters, their plans, their desires, and all their ways are the exact opposite of his, and his are the exact opposite of theirs.
0.114	They are direct opposites. Until sinners change, what God said will always be true: “I cannot stand them, and they hate me.”
0.115	Holiness means caring about what is right.
0.116	God requires every moral being in the universe to do, feel, and say what is perfectly right, and the penalty for failing is infinite. He cannot require anything less than this without being unjust.
0.117	But sinners do not want to do what is right.
0.118	They want to be free to look out for their own private interests in everything. So of course they think of God as their enemy. He insists that they obey the law of what is right completely, no matter how totally it blocks their selfish plans.
0.119	Also, sinners hate God because he is so good.
0.120	He is good and he does good. He keeps on working for the good of everyone, and he often does it in a way that overturns all their selfish projects and scatters them to the winds. He knocks down the towers of Babel they are trying to climb up to heaven.
0.121	His heart is so set on doing good that, in carrying out his great plan, he has often brought down families and nations that stood in his way. Once he even drowned a whole world of sinners in a flood. He did it to stop the harm they were doing. He did it to bring the world back to a state where he could bring in the law and the Gospel, win mankind back, and save a huge number of people from hell.
0.122	Also, sinners hate God because he does not play favorites.
0.123	They see their own interests as the most important thing of all. They are working with all their might to make everything in the universe bend to serve those interests.
0.124	They want the weather, the winds, and the whole universe, both physical and moral, to fit in with their great goal. That goal is to make their own happiness complete and keep it going forever.
0.125	But God has a completely different goal from theirs. His aim is to increase the happiness of everyone. He increases the happiness of each person only as far as it fits with the happiness and rights of others. So he keeps blocking their favorite projects.
0.126	Even the elements of the physical universe are arranged and controlled in a way that often wrecks their dearest hopes. They destroy forever the dreams they cherish most.
0.127	But that is not all.
0.128	Sinners hate God because he warns that he will punish them for their sins.
0.129	He will not make a deal with them. He insists that they either obey or be damned.
0.130	He requires them to repent and change their lives, or else their souls will be destroyed forever.
0.131	A sinner who will not repent hates both of these choices more than anything.
0.132	To repent means admitting with all his heart that God is right and he is wrong. It means taking God’s side against himself. It means giving up the chase after his own happiness as the thing he wants most. It means giving himself, and all he is and has, to serving God and working for the good of everyone. He is completely unwilling to do this. But God insists on it. God will not make a deal. He demands complete surrender to his will, with no conditions, or else the eternal damnation of the sinner’s soul. So the sinner will not accept either one.
0.133	He thinks of God as his infinite and all-powerful enemy, and he fights against him with all his heart.
0.134	III. Now I will show that sinners hate God for the very reasons they should love him.
0.135	These are the very reasons why all holy beings do love him.
0.136	He is against all sin and every kind of harmful behavior. He cares deeply about the happiness of each person and of everyone together. In short, all the reasons selfish beings are so against him are the very reasons we have a duty to love him. They are why thinking beings who care at all about what is morally right feel that loving their Maker is right. They feel it is a duty that binds them without limit.
0.137	These are the reasons he deserves to be loved, and there are no others.
0.138	And these are exactly the reasons, and the only reasons, that sinners hate him.
0.139	They do not hate him because he deserves their hatred. They hate him because he deserves their love.
0.140	It is not because he is evil, but because he is good.
0.141	It is not because they have any good reason to hate him. It is because they have every possible reason to love him.
0.142	I mean exactly what I say.
0.143	Sinners hate God, and not only in spite of the infinitely strong reasons they have to love him. They hate him because of those very reasons.
0.144	It is not just that these reasons to love him fail to stop them from hating him. These reasons are the very things that make them hate him.
0.145	I will end this sermon with a few remarks.
0.146	First, this subject shows you how ridiculous and hypocritical unbelievers are.
0.147	They very often claim that when they study and search for the truth, they are fair and unbiased.
0.148	They insist that Christians have already taken sides. So, they say, Christians cannot look at Christianity honestly and without bias.
0.149	They say Christians cannot reach a conclusion anyone can trust, because they are already on Christianity’s side.
0.150	But unbelievers seem to think that they themselves are in a position to reach a fair and well-informed conclusion. They think they can examine the question and decide it without any prejudice.
0.151	But this is completely absurd.
0.152	They are not standing on neutral ground, as they think they are.
0.153	They have already taken sides against the Bible.
0.154	Their behavior proves that they are God’s enemies, even without the Bible.
0.155	It is a plain fact that no good being could approve of the way they live. If God is holy, he must hate their way of life.
0.156	You do not need a Bible to prove this.
0.157	Now here is a book that claims to be a message from God. It demands that they be holy in heart and life. It warns them that their sins will bring eternal death.
0.158	So is it not absurd?
0.159	These people are God’s enemies. They have already taken sides against God and against this message from him. Is it not ridiculous and hypocritical for them to set themselves up as the only fair judges?
0.160	Supposedly, they can sit down and study the subject without any bias.
0.161	They are on neutral ground, they say.
0.162	They have no opinions already formed that could lead their judgment astray.
0.163	The truth is this. Suppose Christians really are as biased in favor of Christianity as unbelievers say. Even so, unless unbelievers are willing to say that Christians are perfect—completely without sin and totally devoted to God—it will still turn out that Christians are less likely to be biased for Christianity than unbelievers are to be biased against it.
0.164	Unbelievers are completely against God. As I showed in my last two sermons, all sinners who have not repented are totally corrupt. Until Christians are completely perfect, they will not be as completely biased in favor of God as sinners are in favor of the devil.
0.165	So of course, until then, Christians will not be as likely to judge wrongly in favor of the Bible as sinners are to judge wrongly against it.
0.166	Christians are, on the whole, on God’s side, so they feel strongly attached to the Bible. Yet they still have a lot of sin left in them, so they can easily feel many objections to how strict its demands are. This puts them in the best position, and the best frame of mind, of anyone in this world to judge fairly.
0.167	They are not so wicked that they reject what they can see is true. And they are not such eager people-pleasers that they blindly give in, without checking, to everything that claims the right to be obeyed.
0.168	I do not mean that Christians can judge the truth of the Christian religion better this way than if they were perfect. But I do mean to push back against the absurd claim of unbelievers that a Christian’s faith is nothing more than blindly believing whatever he is told.
0.169	There has never been a time when the church was godly enough to put up with the limits that pure Christianity puts on people, unless the evidence for it struck them with the force of proof.
0.170	Second, this subject shows you that the wicked BEHAVIOR of sinners does not prove that their NATURE IS SINFUL.
0.171	People have thought that because everyone sins, we are forced to conclude that human nature must be sinful in itself.
0.172	People have said there is no other way to explain why everyone behaves sinfully.
0.173	They have argued that an effect must be the same kind of thing as its cause. Since the effects, or actions, of our nature are sinful in every case, they say, our nature, which is the cause, must be sinful too.
0.174	But if an effect must be the same kind of thing as its cause, and a cause must be the same kind of thing as its effect, then God must be made of matter. After all, he is the cause of all matter, so he would have to be matter himself.
0.175	The human soul would also have to be made of matter.
0.176	The soul acts on a person’s physical body. It makes the body act on other physical things around it. Since the soul is always causing physical changes all around, the soul would have to be physical.
0.177	That would be a quick way to get rid of the existence of all spirits!
0.178	But who would really accept this way of arguing? Who would seriously take as truth the absurd idea that an effect always decides what its cause is like?
0.179	The principles in this sermon explain easily and naturally why all people behave sinfully.
0.180	At the very start, every person takes selfishness as the main rule for how to act. Because of the very laws of how the mind works, this spoils all their moral behavior. It makes every moral action sinful.
0.181	Someone may ask, “How can it be that all children choose selfishness, unless their nature is sinful?” My answer is this. They choose to live for pleasing themselves, which is selfishness, because they have human nature. They also come into the world in the special circumstances in which all of Adam’s children have been born since the fall. But it is not because human nature is sinful in itself.
0.182	The reason they become sinners is found in two things. Their nature is what it is, and it is surrounded by the special temptations they face in a world full of sinners.
0.183	All the natural appetites and desires of the body and mind are innocent in themselves. But when they are strongly stirred up, they become a powerful temptation to give in to what is forbidden.
0.184	Temptation appeals to these natural appetites and desires so often that it leads every human being into sin.
0.185	Adam was created as a perfect, full-grown man. He certainly did not have a sinful nature. And yet temptation appealed to his innocent natural appetites, and that led him into sin.
0.186	Adam was a grown man without a sinful nature. He had lived for a time in obedience and perfect holiness. Yet temptation appealed to his innocent natural desires, and he changed his mind. Now think about babies. They have the same nature Adam had, and they are surrounded by even greater temptations. So how can the fact that all of them fall into sin prove that their nature itself is sinful?
0.187	Do we have to draw that conclusion?
0.188	Is it even a fair conclusion? Think about it! Adam was holy and grown up. Temptation appealed to his innocent nature and led him to choose selfishness. Yet no one suspects, or could suspect, that he had a sinful nature. But when little children are led into sin, in circumstances of temptation made even worse by the fall, we are supposed to believe their nature is sinful!
0.189	What wonderful reasoning! And what makes it even more absurd is this: to accept that our nature is sinful, we have to believe that sin is found in the material we are made of, and not in the choices we make. And that is impossible.
0.190	And what makes it especially guilty to conclude that our nature is sinful is this: to do it, we have to reject God’s own statement that “sin is breaking the law,” and accept a definition that is completely absurd.
0.191	Third, from the view of depravity I have given in these sermons, it is easy to see in what way sin is natural to sinners. It is also easy to see why people have blamed their nature when sin breaks out, as if their nature itself were sinful.
0.192	Everything we experience shows that, because of the way we are made, what our minds prefer most influences how we act, directly or indirectly.
0.193	In other words, when we want something more than anything else, it is natural for us to go after it. We may want some things that we do not go after.
0.194	But it makes no sense to say that we do not go after the thing we want most.
0.195	Wanting something most is the same thing as choosing it above all else, and that choice is in control. The will controls our actions. Just as surely, and just as naturally, we will go after the thing we want most.
0.196	So sinners have chosen selfishness as the ruling principle of their lives. As long as that selfishness stays in control, it is certain and natural that they will sin, and do nothing but sin. This fits exactly with the laws of how their minds work. In fact, it is the result of those laws.
0.197	As long as they hold on to selfishness as the most important thing, they cannot obey.
0.198	That is why “the sinful mind, the mind set on the flesh, does not obey God’s law, and in fact it cannot.”
0.199	So it is no surprise that sinners whose deepest choice is selfish find it very natural to sin, and extremely hard to do anything but sin.
0.200	Everyone has noticed this. So people have blamed human sin on human nature, and many have found fault with nature itself. But the truth is that sin is only the misuse of the powers our nature has.
0.201	Very many people have missed this fact: a deep but freely chosen preference for sin is the foundation, the source, and the cause of all other sins.
0.202	Sin is natural to people in only one way. It is natural for the mind to be guided in each thing it does by whatever it has chosen or prefers above all else.
0.203	So it will always be natural for a sinner to sin until he changes what his mind prefers most. He must come to prefer the glory of God and the good of God’s kingdom over his own separate interests that fight against them.
0.204	Fourth, here you can see what a change of heart is.
0.205	You can see what it is, why it is needed, and why the sinner has a duty to change his heart right away.
0.206	You can also see that the first thing a sinner will do, or can do, that God can accept must be to change his heart. That means changing the preference that rules his mind above everything else.
0.207	Fifth, someone may object, “If babies are not born with a sinful nature, then how are they saved by grace?”
0.208	But I ask in return, “If they are born with a sinful nature, how are they saved by grace?”
0.209	Does God create a baby as a sinner, and then call it grace when he saves the baby from the sinfulness of a nature that he himself created?
0.210	That is absurd, and it insults God! Think of it! People describe the ever-blessed God as either creating a sinful nature directly, or setting things up so that a nature sinful in itself had to be passed down from Adam, with no way around it. And then they call it grace when the baby is saved! (Saved not from what it has done, but from its nature!)
0.211	But let us take a look at this.
0.212	Here are two views. The first view says that babies have no moral character at all until they have actually broken God’s law.
0.213	It says that their first moral actions are always sinful, but that before they make moral choices they are neither sinful nor holy.
0.214	It says that since they have no moral character, they deserve neither praise nor blame. They deserve neither life nor death from God.
0.215	God could wipe them out of existence without being unfair, or he may give them eternal life as a free gift they have not earned.
0.216	The other view says that babies have a sinful nature that they inherited from Adam.
0.217	The Bible teaches that everyone in the human family who is ever saved must be saved by grace. Those who hold the view that babies’ nature is sinful think theirs is the only view that can give grace the credit for saving babies who die before they actually sin.
0.218	But let us look at these two views for a few moments.
0.219	The Bible clearly uses the word grace in different ways.
0.220	Sometimes it means the same thing as holiness.
0.221	To grow in grace means to grow in holiness.
0.222	Its most common meaning seems to be kindness that we do not deserve.
0.223	Sometimes it is used in a wider way that includes the idea of mercy or forgiveness.
0.224	Now, when babies die before they actually sin, the only way their salvation can come from grace is in the sense of kindness they did not deserve or earn.
0.225	If they have never sinned, they cannot be saved by grace if by grace we mean mercy or forgiveness.
0.226	To say a child can be forgiven for having a sinful nature is ridiculous nonsense. A baby who dies before actually sinning can be called saved by grace only in the sense of kindness it did not deserve, and not in the sense of mercy or forgiveness.
0.227	In this sense, the baby’s salvation is by grace.
0.228	The baby has never earned eternal life. He has never done anything that makes God owe it to him to save him. God could wipe him out of existence without being unfair at all.
0.229	But suppose it pleases God, for Christ’s sake, to give eternal life to someone he could fairly wipe out of existence. I fully believe it does please him. Then he is showing that child infinite kindness.
0.230	But let us look at the other view for a moment.
0.231	This view denies that babies have a sinful nature. It rejects the monstrous idea that God created their nature sinful and then pretends to save the baby by grace from a nature he himself created, as if the baby deserved to be damned for being what God made it.
0.232	People who hold this view insist that their view shows just as much grace in saving babies as the impossible teaching of a sinful nature does.
0.233	The truth is that the very existence of the whole human race is purely a matter of grace, and it is connected to the atonement of Jesus Christ.
0.234	If the atonement had not already been planned, Adam and Eve would have been sent to hell right away and would never have had any children or descendants.
0.235	The human race could never have existed.
0.236	There could never have been any babies or adults (except Adam and Eve) if Christ had not graciously stepped in for mankind by his atonement.
0.237	No doubt it was because God looked ahead to this, and because of it, that Adam and Eve were spared. That is why the law’s sentence was not carried out on them right away.
0.238	So every baby owes its very existence to God’s grace in Jesus Christ. And if it dies before it actually sins, it owes its eternal life to Christ just as completely as if it had been the worst sinner on earth.
0.239	In neither of these views does the grace that saves babies include forgiveness. But in both views they are saved by grace, because they owe their very existence to Christ’s atonement. And in both cases they are rescued from circumstances in which, if they had lived long enough to form a moral character, they certainly would have sinned and deserved eternal death.
0.240	So suppose someone objects to the view of depravity I have given in these sermons by saying it denies God’s grace in saving babies. That person either misunderstands what I have taught or is twisting it on purpose.
0.241	I want to ask a question, and I wish someone would answer it, if it can be answered. How does one view show any more grace in saving babies than the other?
0.242	Will someone say that if babies’ nature is sinful, grace must change it? Will they say this is the difference: in neither case does the baby need forgiveness, but in one case its nature needs to be changed, and in the other it does not?
0.243	But suppose his nature does need to be changed.
0.244	I deny that changing it is an act of grace. If God made his nature wrong, so that it can do nothing but sinful actions, then God is obligated to change it.
0.245	Calling this grace is the worst kind of trifling. Think of making a being come into existence with a sinful or faulty nature, and then calling it grace to change that nature and make it what it should have been in the first place. That is playing games with serious things, and it is telling lies on God’s behalf.
