0.1	The next subject is perhaps the hardest of all to deal with. It is forgiveness.
0.2	I believe this keeps more people from having power with God than anything else. They are not willing to develop a forgiving spirit.
0.3	If we let a root of bitterness grow up in our hearts against someone, our prayer will not be answered.
0.4	It may not be easy to live in sweet fellowship with everyone we come in contact with. But that is exactly what God gives us His grace for.
0.5	The disciples’ prayer is a test of whether we are God’s sons. If we can pray all of it from the heart, we have good reason to believe that we have been born of God.
0.6	No one can call God Father except by the Spirit.
0.7	This prayer has been a great blessing to the world. Yet I believe it has also been a great trap. Many people stumble over it and are lost.
0.8	They don’t think about what it means. They don’t take its truths deep into their hearts.
0.9	I have no sympathy for the idea that all people are sons of God.
0.10	The Bible teaches very clearly that we are adopted into God’s family.
0.11	If everyone were already a son, God would not need to adopt anyone.
0.12	We all belong to God because He created us. But some people teach that anyone can say, “Our Father in heaven,” whether he is born of God or not. I think that goes against Scripture.
0.13	“All who are led by the Spirit of God are sons of God.”
0.14	Being a son in God’s family is the privilege of the believer.
0.15	The apostle says, “By this the children of God and the children of the devil are made plain.”
0.16	If we are doing God’s will, that is a very good sign that we are born of God.
0.17	If we have no desire to do His will, how can we call God “Our Father”?
0.18	Here is another thing. We cannot really pray for God’s kingdom to come until we are in it.
0.19	Suppose we pray for God’s kingdom to come while we are rebelling against Him. Then we are only asking for our own condemnation.
0.20	No one whose heart has not been made new really wants God’s will to be done on earth.
0.21	Over the door of every unsaved person’s house, and over his place of business, you could write: “God’s will is not done here.”
0.22	If the nations really prayed this prayer, they could send all their armies home.
0.23	We are told there are about twelve million men in the standing armies of Europe alone.
0.24	But people don’t want God’s will done on earth as it is in heaven. That is the problem.
0.25	Now let’s come to the part I want to spend time on: “Forgive us the wrongs we have done, as we forgive those who have wronged us.”
0.26	This is the only part of the prayer that Christ explained.
0.27	“If you forgive people the wrongs they do, your heavenly Father will forgive you too. But if you don’t forgive people their wrongs, your Father will not forgive your wrongs.”
0.28	Notice this: when you go through the door into God’s kingdom, you go in through the door of forgiveness.
0.29	I have never known anyone to receive a blessing in his own soul if he was not willing to forgive others.
0.30	If we are unwilling to forgive others, God cannot forgive us.
0.31	I don’t see how words could be any plainer than these words of our Lord.
0.32	I truly believe that a great many prayers are not answered because we are not willing to forgive someone.
0.33	Think back over the past. Go through all the people you know. Is there anyone you hold hard feelings against?
0.34	Is a root of bitterness growing in you against someone who may have hurt you?
0.35	Maybe you have been nursing this unforgiving spirit for months or even years. How can you ask God to forgive you?
0.36	Suppose I am not willing to forgive people who may have wronged me just once. How mean and shameful it would be for me to ask God to forgive the ten thousand sins I am guilty of!
0.37	But Christ goes even further.
0.38	He says: “If you bring your gift to the altar and remember there that your brother has something against you, leave your gift there in front of the altar and go. First make peace with your brother. Then come and offer your gift.”
0.39	Maybe you are saying, “I don’t think I have anything against anyone.”
0.40	Does anyone have something against you?
0.41	Is there someone who thinks you have wronged them?
0.42	Maybe you haven’t. But they may think you have.
0.43	I’ll tell you what I would do before I go to sleep tonight. I would go and see them and get the matter settled.
0.44	You will find that you are greatly blessed in the very act of doing it.
0.45	Suppose you are in the right and they are in the wrong. You may win over your brother or sister.
0.46	May God pull this unforgiving spirit out of all our hearts by the roots.
0.47	Some time ago a man came to me. He wanted me to talk to his wife about her soul.
0.48	She seemed as eager as anyone I had ever met. I thought it would not take long to lead her into the light. But the longer I talked with her, the darker things seemed to get for her.
0.49	I went to see her again the next day. I found her in even greater darkness of soul.
0.50	I thought something must be standing in the way that I had not yet found. So I asked her to say the disciples’ prayer with me.
0.51	I thought that if she could say this prayer from the heart, the Lord would meet her with peace.
0.52	I began to say it one sentence at a time, and she repeated each one after me. Then I came to this request: “Forgive us the wrongs we have done, as we forgive those who have wronged us.”
0.53	There she stopped. I said it a second time and waited for her to repeat it. She said she could not do it.
0.54	“What is the problem?”
0.55	She answered, “There is one woman I will never forgive.”
0.56	“Oh,” I said, “now I see what’s wrong. There is no use in my going on to pray. Your prayers will not go any higher than my head.
0.57	God says He will not forgive you unless you forgive others.
0.58	If you do not forgive this woman, God will never forgive you.
0.59	That is what heaven has decided.”
0.60	She said, “Are you saying that I cannot be forgiven until I have forgiven her?”
0.61	“No, I am not saying it. The Lord says it, and He is a far better authority.”
0.62	She said, “Then I will never be forgiven.”
0.63	I left the house without having made any impression on her.
0.64	A few years later I heard that this woman was in a mental asylum.
0.65	I believe this unforgiving spirit drove her insane.
0.66	If someone has something against you, go right away and make peace with them.
0.67	If you have something against anyone, write them a letter. Tell them that you forgive them. That way you will get this thing off your conscience.
0.68	I remember being in the inquiry room some years ago. I was in one corner of the room, talking with a young woman.
0.69	Something seemed to be in the way, but I could not find out what it was.
0.70	At last I asked, “Isn’t there someone you are not forgiving?”
0.71	She looked up at me and said, “Why did you ask that?
0.72	Has someone told you about me?”
0.73	“No,” I said. “But I thought that might be the case, because you have not received forgiveness yourself.”
0.74	“Well,” she said, pointing to another corner of the room, where a young woman was sitting, “I have had trouble with that young woman. We haven’t spoken to each other for a long time.”
0.75	“Oh,” I said, “now it is all clear to me. You cannot be forgiven until you are willing to forgive her.”
0.76	It was a hard struggle.
0.77	But you know, the greater the cross, the greater the blessing.
0.78	To make mistakes is human. But to forgive and be forgiven is like Christ.
0.79	At last this young woman said, “I will go and forgive her.”
0.80	Strangely enough, the same struggle was going on in the mind of the woman in the other part of the room.
0.81	They both came to their senses at about the same time.
0.82	They met each other in the middle of the room.
0.83	One of them tried to say that she forgave the other, but they could not finish. So they rushed into each other’s arms.
0.84	Then the four of us—the two seekers and the two workers—knelt down together, and we had a wonderful meeting.
0.85	These two went away full of joy.
0.86	Dear friend, is this why your prayers are not being answered?
0.87	Is there a friend, a family member, or someone in the church that you have not forgiven?
0.88	Sometimes we hear of members of the same church who have not spoken to each other for years.
0.89	How can we expect God to forgive when that is the case?
0.90	I remember one town that Mr. Sankey and I visited.
0.91	For a week it felt as if we were just beating the air. There was no power in the meetings.
0.92	Finally, one day I said that perhaps someone was holding on to this unforgiving spirit.
0.93	The chairman of our committee was sitting next to me. He got up and left the meeting in full view of the audience.
0.94	The arrow had hit its target. It had gone straight to the heart of the committee chairman.
0.95	He had been in conflict with someone for about six months.
0.96	He went at once to find this man and asked him to forgive him.
0.97	He came to me with tears in his eyes and said, “I thank God you ever came here.”
0.98	That night the inquiry room was crowded.
0.99	The chairman became one of the best workers I have ever known. He has been active in Christian service ever since.
0.100	Several years ago the Church of England sent a devoted missionary to New Zealand.
0.101	He worked hard there for a few years, and his work was successful. Then one Sunday he was leading a communion service in an area where the converts had been savages not long before.
0.102	As the missionary was leading the service, he noticed one of the men. Just as the man was about to kneel at the rail, he suddenly jumped up and hurried to the opposite end of the church.
0.103	After a while he came back and calmly took his place.
0.104	After the service the minister took him aside and asked him why he had acted so strangely.
0.105	He answered: “As I was about to kneel, I recognized the man next to me. He was the chief of a neighboring tribe. He had murdered my father and drunk his blood. And I had sworn by all the gods that I would kill that man at the first chance I got.
0.106	At first the urge to take revenge almost overpowered me. So I rushed away, as you saw, to escape its power.
0.107	I stood at the other end of the room and thought about why we were meeting. Then I thought of Him who prayed for His own murderers: ‘Father, forgive them, for they don’t know what they are doing.’
0.108	And I felt that I could forgive the man who murdered my father. So I came back and knelt down beside him.”
0.109	As someone has said: “There is an ugly kind of forgiveness in the world. It is a kind of hedgehog forgiveness, shot out like quills.
0.110	People take someone who has offended them and set him in front of the blowtorch of their anger. They scorch him and burn his fault into him. And when they have kneaded him enough with their fists, then they forgive him.”
0.111	The father of Frederick the Great was on his deathbed. His spiritual adviser, M. Roloff, warned him that he must forgive his enemies.
0.112	This troubled him a great deal. After a moment he said to the Queen: “Feekin, after I am dead you may write to your brother (the King of England). Tell him that I forgave him and died at peace with him.”
0.113	M. Roloff gently suggested, “It would be better for Your Majesty to write now.”
0.114	“No,” was the stern answer.
0.115	“Write after I am dead.
0.116	That will be safer.”
0.117	Another story tells of a man who thought he was about to die. He told someone who had hurt him that he forgave him. But then he added, “Now remember, if I get well, the old grudge still stands.”
0.118	My friends, that is not forgiveness at all.
0.119	I believe true forgiveness includes forgetting the offense. It means putting it completely out of our hearts and memories.
0.120	As Matthew Henry says: “We do not forgive our brother who has offended us in the right way, or in a way God accepts, unless we forgive him from the heart. For that is what God looks at.
0.121	No hatred must be kept there, and no ill will toward anyone. No plans for revenge must be hatched there, and no desire for it. Yet such things are there in many who look peaceful and reconciled on the outside.
0.122	From the heart we must desire and seek the good of those who have offended us.”
0.123	If God forgave the way we often do, His forgiveness would not be worth much.
0.124	Suppose God said, “I will forgive you, but I will never forget it. All through eternity I will keep reminding you of it.” We would not feel that was forgiveness at all.
0.125	Notice what God says: “I will remember their sin no more.”
0.126	In a passage in Ezekiel it says that not one of our sins will be mentioned. Isn’t that just like God?
0.127	I love to preach this forgiveness. It is the sweet truth that sin is blotted out for time and eternity, and it will never once be mentioned against us.
0.128	In another passage of Scripture we read: “I will remember their sins and iniquities no more.”
0.129	Then turn to the eleventh chapter of Hebrews and read God’s honor roll. You will find that not one of the sins of those men of faith is mentioned.
0.130	Abraham is called the man of faith. But it does not tell how he denied his wife down in Egypt. All that had been forgiven.
0.131	Moses was kept out of the Promised Land because he lost his patience. But the New Testament does not mention this, even though his name is on the apostle’s honor roll.
0.132	Samson is named too, but his sins are not brought up again.
0.133	Why, we even read of “righteous Lot.” In the Old Testament story he did not look much like a righteous man. But he has been forgiven, and God has made him “righteous.”
0.134	Once God has forgiven us, our sins will never again be remembered against us.
0.135	This is God’s eternal decree.
0.136	Brooks speaks of the pardon God gives His people: “When God pardons sin, He takes it completely away. Even if someone searched for it, it could not be found. As the prophet Jeremiah says: ‘In those days and at that time, says the Lord, people will search for the iniquity of Israel, but there will be none; and for the sins of Judah, but they will not be found; for I will pardon those I preserve.’
0.137	When David saw in Mephibosheth the features of his friend Jonathan, he took no notice of his lameness or any other defect or deformity. In the same way, when God sees in His people the glorious image of His Son, He overlooks all their faults and deformities. This made Luther say, ‘Do with me what You want, since You have pardoned my sin.’
0.138	And what is pardoning sin, except no longer mentioning it?”
0.139	We read in the Gospel of Matthew: “Also, if your brother sins against you, go and show him his fault, just between the two of you. If he listens to you, you have gained your brother.”
0.140	A little further on we read that Peter comes to Christ and asks, “How often should I forgive my brother when he sins against me?
0.141	Up to seven times?” Jesus answered, “I don’t say up to seven times, but up to seventy times seven.”
0.142	Peter did not seem to think he was in danger of falling into sin. His question was, “How often should I forgive my brother?”
0.143	But very soon we hear that Peter has fallen.
0.144	I can imagine that when he did fall, a sweet thought came to him. He remembered what the Master had said about forgiving up to seventy times seven.
0.145	The voice of sin may be loud, but the voice of forgiveness is louder.
0.146	Let us enter into David’s experience when he said: “Blessed is the one whose wrongdoing is forgiven, whose sin is covered.
0.147	Blessed is the man whose sin the Lord does not count against him, and whose spirit has no deceit.
0.148	When I kept silent, my bones grew old from my crying out all day long.
0.149	Day and night Your hand was heavy on me. The moisture in me was turned into the dryness of summer.
0.150	I admitted my sin to You and did not hide my wrongdoing.
0.151	I said, ‘I will confess my wrongdoings to the Lord.’ And You forgave the wickedness of my sin.”
0.152	David could look down and up, back and ahead—to the past, the present, and the future—and know that all was well.
0.153	Let us decide that we will not rest until this question of sin is settled forever. Then we can look up and claim God as our forgiving Father.
0.154	Let us be willing to forgive others, so that we can claim forgiveness from God. Let us remember the words of the Lord Jesus, when He said: “If you forgive people the wrongs they do, your heavenly Father will forgive you too. But if you don’t forgive people their wrongs, your Father will not forgive your wrongs.”
