0.1	This is why the letter was written. Philemon lived in Colosse. (We can see this clearly from the last chapter of Paul’s letter to the Colossians.
0.2	The letter to the church in Colosse was written at the same time as this letter to Philemon.
0.3	Onesimus and another brother carried both letters: the one to the church in Colosse and this private one to Philemon.) Philemon, who lived in Colosse, had a slave named Onesimus. While this slave was still ungodly, he ran away from his master Philemon. Then, by God’s providence, as we say, he came to Rome.
0.4	At that time Rome was the greatest city in the whole world.
0.5	This slave probably said to himself, “If only I could get to Rome! Think of all the chances I would have there.”
0.6	He may have thought of this after he left his master.
0.7	He travels on from Asia Minor to Rome, full of bright hopes.
0.8	“Oh, what pleasures I will enjoy in Rome! What sights I will see in Rome! What friends I will find in Rome!”
0.9	No doubt he thought something like this.
0.10	And what happened in Rome?
0.11	He was converted. This is how God lets people go their own way. He lets them follow the desires of their own hearts. And if they could, they would run farther and farther away from him.
0.12	But God says, “You shall go this far, and no farther.”
0.13	Many people have gone to London and other places. They did not go there to do good to their souls but to serve the devil. Yet God took hold of them there, in the very way they least expected, and converted them.
0.14	Again, Onesimus could have come to Rome and never met Paul.
0.15	He could have lived in Rome for fifty years and never met Paul. But God had plans of grace and mercy for him. So in his good providence, God arranged for him to cross paths with Paul. He had to get to know this man Paul.
0.16	And who was Paul in Rome at this time?
0.17	He was not a great man in the eyes of the world.
0.18	In one way he truly was a great man. But in another way he was completely unknown.
0.19	At this time Paul was a prisoner because of the gospel.
0.20	Paul did not walk around in the marketplace, the Forum, where the great and wealthy people of the capital gathered.
0.21	He was in prison, with a soldier guarding him. Yet God arranged things so that this runaway slave had to meet Paul. And Paul became a blessed tool in God’s hands to convert his soul.
0.22	This should greatly encourage all of us!
0.23	Some of you have loved ones who are far from Christ—fathers, mothers, brothers, sisters, and other relatives. Many of them seem to be moving farther and farther from God. They care less and less about the things of God and more and more about the things of this world.
0.24	Dear ones in Christ, keep bringing them before the Lord, with faith and patience. One day you will have the joy of finding out that your prayers were not in vain.
0.25	We have every reason to believe that Philemon, this slave’s godly master, cared about his spiritual well-being. But when the slave ran away, all seemed lost. Yet God followed him. He took hold of him at the very time when you and I would least have expected him to be brought to the Lord.
0.26	Let us read this letter to Philemon and think deeply about it.
0.27	Verse 1: “Paul, a prisoner of Jesus Christ, and Timothy our brother, to Philemon, whom we love dearly and who works with us.”
0.28	Paul saw Philemon as someone who worked with him for the gospel.
0.29	He speaks of him as a co-worker and treats him that way.
0.30	Verse 2: “And to our dear Apphia (Philemon’s wife), and to Archippus, who fights alongside us (this Archippus was a brother who worked hard at preaching and teaching in Colosse), and to the church in your house.”
0.31	The house of Archippus was where the church met. In those days people did not build churches and chapels. Instead, believers met in private homes or in places set up for that purpose.
0.32	We see an example of this in Acts chapter 20, where Paul was preaching in an upstairs room.
0.33	The disciples did not try to have expensive buildings that looked like the temple in Jerusalem.
0.34	The first 120 believers met in an upstairs room.
0.35	In the same way, the church in Colosse met in Philemon’s house.
0.36	Verse 3: “Grace to you.”
0.37	Notice how these words come up in the different letters to the churches. There must be a reason for this.
0.38	It is not just a common phrase that is added in.
0.39	The reason seems to be this. We need to be reminded that God has given us grace through Christ Jesus. And he is willing to give us more and more blessing.
0.40	In the same way, we need to be reminded again and again that we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ.
0.41	Right now I am speaking only to those who trust in the Lord Jesus Christ. They have passed judgment on themselves. They have condemned themselves before God as guilty sinners. Now they trust in the death of the Lord Jesus Christ, which paid for sin, as the only basis on which God accepts them.
0.42	Verses 4–7: “I thank my God, and I always mention you in my prayers. For I hear about your love and faith toward the Lord Jesus and toward all the saints. I pray that the sharing of your faith will become effective as you recognize every good thing that is in you in Christ Jesus.
0.43	For your love has given us great joy and comfort, because you, brother, have refreshed the hearts of the saints.”
0.44	This is what the apostle Paul writes about Philemon’s spiritual condition. It is high praise. He was a most blessed man of God. And yet someone says, “He had slaves!”
0.45	Yes, he had slaves.
0.46	But we must always remember this. Owning slaves at that time did not involve the terrible cruelty of slavery in modern times.
0.47	Many of these people worshiped idols, and many things connected with slavery were quite wrong.
0.48	Still, generally speaking, we have no reason to believe that there were cruelties like those of slave owners in modern times.
0.49	In most places where we read the word “servant,” it means a slave, someone who belonged to a master. But not even once is there a hint of saying, “How wicked you are! How cruel and horrible your conduct is!”
0.50	If the love of Christ had moved them to set all their slaves free, the apostles would have been glad. And when these slaves had the chance to become free, they were to accept it thankfully and not turn it down.
0.51	The apostle Paul praises Philemon because he was in such a blessed spiritual condition.
0.52	He says, “I thank my God.” He says this especially because of verse 5: “I hear about your love and faith.”
0.53	This gave Paul reason to praise and thank God in his heart for Philemon.
0.54	This is a rather remarkable phrase: “faith and love toward the saints.”
0.55	We can understand what it means that he had love. But what does it mean that he had faith toward the saints?
0.56	Have you ever thought about this?
0.57	It is very important that we try to search out the meaning of what we read in God’s Word.
0.58	The meaning is clearly this. He looked at them with faith. He saw that they are God’s children, and he treated them as God’s children.
0.59	Whenever we are able to see one another as children of God, and whenever we are able to see Christ in one another, we are showing faith toward one another.
0.60	He also prayed that God would help Philemon even more. We should learn from this. Just as Paul prayed for Philemon, we should pray for each other.
0.61	This is what he prayed: “that the sharing of your faith will become effective as you recognize every good thing that is in you in Christ Jesus.”
0.62	In other words, he is saying: “My dear Philemon, you have received faith, and I pray that you will keep going. I pray that your faith will give you energy and become effective in you. I pray it will give you more and more strength to recognize everything that is good in any of the saints.”
0.63	In verse 7 he adds this to his praise: “For your love has given us great joy and comfort, because you, brother, have refreshed the hearts of the saints.”
0.64	What high praise for this dear man!
0.65	He was clearly fairly wealthy and prosperous. And Paul says, “We have great joy.” Why? Because Philemon, this blessed man of God, lived such a holy and godly life that the hearts of the saints were refreshed.
0.66	Do we, as God’s children, aim for this? Do we try to be a spiritual refreshment to the saints, so that they are refreshed by our godly lives?
0.67	This is what we must aim for.
0.68	When we give in to our natural tendencies, to our temper, and to other things God hates, we do not strengthen the hands of our fellow disciples. But when we try to do what agrees with the mind of God, we strengthen each other’s hands in God.
0.69	When we bring glory to God, we also help other children of God in their life and conduct.
0.70	It is just like an army. If one regiment fights well, the other regiments are strengthened. If one regiment turns its back on the enemy, the other regiments are weakened.
0.71	It is the same with the Church of God.
0.72	Verses 8–14: “So, even though I could be very bold in Christ and order you to do what is right, I would rather appeal to you out of love. I appeal as Paul, an old man, and now also a prisoner of Jesus Christ.
0.73	I appeal to you for my son Onesimus. He became my son in the faith while I was in chains. In the past he was of no use to you, but now he is useful both to you and to me. I have sent him back to you. So welcome him, for he is my very own heart. I would have liked to keep him with me. Then he could have served me in your place while I am in chains for the gospel. But I would do nothing without your agreement. I wanted your good deed to be done willingly, not as something you had to do.”
0.74	This is a beautiful statement, and it is deeply important.
0.75	In short, this is what happened. Onesimus was converted. Paul was a prisoner in chains for the gospel.
0.76	What a comfort this good man would have been to him by serving him!
0.77	Paul longed to have someone to serve him.
0.78	Paul could have said, “This Onesimus is my son in the faith. So I will act as I have a right to act. I will just keep him and let him serve me.”
0.79	He could have said, “I am an apostle. I am here in prison for the sake of the gospel. It is right and proper that my child in the faith should serve me.”
0.80	Not that way. Not that way.
0.81	That was not the mind of Christ. And this blessed man of God tried to act according to the mind of Christ.
0.82	He could have said, “I am an old servant of Christ, an old apostle. I have worked harder than any of the others. And since this runaway slave was converted through me, it is only right that I should have him serve me.”
0.83	Not that way, because that would be done under pressure.
0.84	He would not know whether Philemon was doing it willingly and cheerfully.
0.85	He wanted this man of God to do what he did cheerfully and willingly.
0.86	Oh, how important it is for us to remember this!
0.87	The principle is simply this.
0.88	Suppose someone said, “I am in great need. This person is my brother in Christ, and he has plenty of money. He ought to give to me because I am a poor brother. God’s Word requires him to do it, and I have a right to demand it from him.”
0.89	Is this the mind of Christ?
0.90	It is the mind of the flesh, not the mind of Christ.
0.91	You will never find a man of God doing this in the epistles or the gospels.
0.92	It is true that if someone has this world’s goods and sees his brother in need but shuts his heart of compassion, the love of God cannot be in him. But on the other hand, it is also true that it is not fitting for a poor brother to insist on it.
0.93	The apostle Paul could have insisted on his rights, but he did not.
0.94	“In the past he was of no use to you.”
0.95	This shows what kind of man Onesimus was: a good-for-nothing, a bad fellow.
0.96	Philemon had lost nothing.
0.97	“But now he is useful to you and to me.”
0.98	Why? Because he was a child of God, a brother in Christ, a member of the body.
0.99	This shows us another very important principle.
0.100	Every child of God is good for something.
0.101	Someone might say, “Here is a very ignorant person who cannot even put two letters together. What good is someone like that to the Church of Christ?”
0.102	If nothing else, that person gives others a chance to show grace.
0.103	Here is someone who lies helpless in bed year after year.
0.104	That person can pray. That person can still show the mind of Christ to anyone who comes to visit.
0.105	And suppose none of this were true. Even then, they give those who are healthy and strong the chance to show love to them.
0.106	We should always see one another as precious in Christ’s sight.
0.107	Our natural tendency is to see the old Adam in one another. We see one another’s failings and shortcomings. The result is misery for one another and dishonor to God.
0.108	Oh, dear ones in Christ, let us aim to see Christ in one another.
0.109	Onesimus was useful to the greatest of the apostles. Just think of that!
0.110	He could not be useless, because he was a member of the body of Christ. And Christ has no member of his body who is completely useless.
0.111	“So welcome him, for he is my very own heart.”
0.112	Philemon was to welcome him as if Paul himself had come.
0.113	And oh, how would Paul have been welcomed?
0.114	Philemon would say, “Oh, dear brother Paul, how glad I am to see you here again!” He would throw his arms around Paul’s neck and kiss him many times.
0.115	Now Paul says, “Dear Philemon, welcome this runaway slave just as you would welcome me if I came. For he is your brother in Christ, and you will spend a happy eternity with him.”
0.116	“But I would do nothing without your agreement.”
0.117	But first I must know that this pleases you. I must know that you are satisfied with it and that it is what you wish and want.
0.118	How important it is to remember this in our life with God: that we show the mind of Christ.
0.119	That blessed One did not try to please himself. Instead, he chose to be the servant of others. In the same way, we must follow the example of that blessed One.
0.120	“Perhaps this is why he went away for a while: so that you could receive him forever.” “Forever”—never to be separated again.
0.121	This brings us to a precious truth. The disciples of the Lord Jesus are bound together for eternity. They are knit together forever.
0.122	And you see, that is so precious.
0.123	We may be separated by distance. We may be separated by death. But that is only how it looks.
0.124	We are bound together by the bonds of love, not just for this life, but for eternity.
0.125	All the poor sinners who rely on the death of the Lord Jesus, which paid for sin, form one holy, happy, blessed family forever. And there will be no separation, ever.
0.126	Do we belong to that family?
0.127	Do we believe in the Lord Jesus?
0.128	How many of us belong to the heavenly family?
0.129	How many of us have made up our minds yet?
0.130	Ask yourselves this question—you dear young men, you dear girls from the Orphan Houses, and everyone here.
0.131	Oh, how blessed it is to belong to the heavenly family!
0.132	Oh, how blessed it is to be counted among the members of Christ!
0.133	Then let come what may—we are one in Christ, and one in Christ forever!
