0.1	I first met Mr. Craik in July 1829.
0.2	Several things were true of us both. We were both nearly twenty-four years old then. We had both been to university. At that time we were both studying the Hebrew language with great love and eagerness. We had even both come to know the Lord Jesus at about the same time, while we were at university. But none of these things is what drew me to him. What did draw me to him will become clear in what follows.
0.3	In May 1829, soon after I arrived in England, I became very ill.
0.4	At that time I had a strong desire to leave this life and be with my Lord, whom I adore. He had loved me and given Himself for me, the great sinner.
0.5	But God was pleased to begin to make me well again. I had not expected this, and above all I had not wanted it. To finish my recovery, the doctors advised me to leave London for a change of air.
0.6	I went to Teignmouth, submitting to God’s will. In my heart I did not want to live any longer. Still, I thought it was my duty to use this means.
0.7	While I was in Teignmouth, I met Mr. Craik. His warm heart toward the Lord drew me to him.
0.8	That was what attracted me.
0.9	I stayed in Teignmouth only a few weeks, so I did not see much of him. But in January 1830 I went back to Teignmouth, and from then on I lived there.
0.10	Now we were drawn together more fully. Between July 1829 and January 1830, I had come to see the main truths about the second coming of our Lord Jesus. I had come to understand that the Holy Scriptures are fully enough as our rule, and the Holy Spirit is fully enough as our teacher. I had seen clearly the precious teachings about the grace of God. For nearly four years after I was converted, no one had taught me about them. And I had learned about the heavenly calling of the church of Christ, and what that means for the believer’s place in this world.
0.11	These same truths filled Mr. Craik’s heart too. So we were soon drawn close together. From then until the day he fell asleep in Jesus, our friendship was close and unbroken for thirty-six years.
0.12	The reader will learn from the memoir itself that we kept working in the Word in the same area of Devonshire for about two years and three months. Then, in a very clear way, we were both led to Bristol at the same time. We have worked together there for more than thirty-three years.
0.13	People have often said how remarkable it was that we worked together so peacefully for so many years, and that this lasted right to the end.
0.14	As I write this introduction to help the reader, I want to spend a little time on this point.
0.15	It was not because Mr. Craik had no mind of his own and so always gave in to my judgment. Nor was it because I had no judgment of my own and blindly followed him.
0.16	All our Christian friends who knew us knew very well that this was not so at all. These were the real reasons. In 1832 I saw that some people liked my dear friend’s preaching more than mine. So I decided, in God’s strength, to rejoice in this instead of envying him.
0.17	Like John the Baptist, I said, “A person can receive nothing unless it is given to him from heaven” (John 3:27).
0.18	By resisting the devil in this way, I kept our hearts from being divided.
0.19	But that was not all.
0.20	From that time on, God also greatly honored my preaching of the Word. I mention this only to show that a double blessing came when I resisted the devil.
0.21	Then, from the beginning of 1839 onward, the Lord graciously chose to give me great honor. He did this through the Orphan Houses and the other work of the Scriptural Knowledge Institution for Home and Abroad. Now the temptation went the other way. This was especially true as the work grew larger and larger, and God’s blessing on it grew greater and greater.
0.22	Now, humanly speaking, it was my dear friend who had reason to be envious.
0.23	But what really happened?
0.24	Few people, if any, were more truly glad than my friend about all the honor the Lord graciously gave me.
0.25	But even that was not all.
0.26	One more thing must be added. Whatever spiritual weaknesses my friend or I had, God gave us an honest aim through all thirty-six years of our friendship. We wanted to live for Him and not for ourselves, and to please Him and not ourselves. That is why our friendship stayed unbroken to the end. And this was true even though, humanly speaking, the temptations to grow apart kept increasing instead of decreasing.
0.27	We were very different in the way our minds worked and in temperament. Yet we had to work together. Since we first came to Bristol, about 2,500 believers have been received into fellowship. In recent years nearly 1,000 believers have been in fellowship in the church that meets at Bethesda and Salem chapels. We worked among them.
0.28	So who can doubt how hard it constantly was to keep on in love and unity? But there was help to be found in God, and we found it to the end.
0.29	This is how we parted when I saw my dear friend for the last time.
0.30	I kissed him and was about to leave. He was too weak to talk any more, but he said, “Sit down.” He also asked Mrs. Craik to sit down. He wanted to look at us, even though he could not talk.
0.31	So I sat there quietly for a while, and then I left.
0.32	That was the last time we were together.
0.33	The next day I caught a cold and had to stay at home for several days. During that time my dear friend died.
0.34	The reader will see from the memoir that Mr. Craik had a very fine mind. But what made him especially lovable to me were these qualities of his character and his spiritual growth:
0.35	1. He was very loving.
0.36	2. Like Nathanael long ago, he was truly without deceit.
0.37	3. He was especially careful to follow his conscience.
0.38	Whatever weaknesses or failings he had, you could be sure that he acted according to his conscience.
0.39	He did what he did because he believed it was right.
0.40	Our views about how certain things should be done were quite different. But I always came back to this: “My friend follows his conscience. If he only saw things as I do, he would surely act differently.”
0.41	4. God gave him great mental powers. But he did not use them to make a name for himself or to be admired by people. He used them to shed light on the Holy Scriptures and to explain the truth.
0.42	Here is a striking proof of his humility, and of how far he was from seeking honor from people. In 1849 Professor Alexander let him know, on behalf of the University of St Andrews, that they planned to give him a degree. It would be the degree of Doctor of Divinity, or Doctor of Canon and Civil Law.
0.43	He politely turned down this honor. Instead he recommended a Christian gentleman who had done much work in biblical studies. He thought the degree might be very useful to that man as an author.
0.44	That was done, and this gentleman was given the degree of Doctor of Laws (LL.D.). Some years ago the same university again told Mr. Craik what they had planned and wanted before. And a second time my friend humbly turned down the honor.
0.45	This is truly a striking proof. He may have had passing moments when he failed in this. But in his heart he was firmly determined not to seek the honor that comes from people. Instead he wanted to present himself to God as His servant.
0.46	5. Mr. Craik showed great sympathy to people who were going through trials and suffering. His loving heart felt deeply for the pain of others.
0.47	6. Mr. Craik was above all a man of prayer. He was also a man devoted to studying the Word of God.
0.48	He prayed over the Holy Scriptures. He truly dug into the Word as if searching for hidden treasure. He meditated on the Word. I never knew any servant of Christ who did these things more than he did.
0.49	The church of Christ as a whole has suffered a loss now that he has been taken away. To all who knew him well, he was a lovely, kind, and truly spiritual Christian. He was also an earnest, devoted preacher of the Lord Jesus. But the main loss is not just that. It is that he was a man who had truly studied the very words of God on his knees, with great care.
0.50	I know thousands of believers. But there is no one whose judgment on any part of the truth I would have valued more than that of my friend who has died. This is because he was very careful and prayerful. He worked hard at comparing Scripture with Scripture. He was humble in soul. He knew a great deal of Greek and Hebrew. And he regularly read the Scriptures in their original languages.
0.51	About Mr. Craik’s health, I must say this, as someone who knew him so well and for so long. When he was about forty, he looked much healthier than when I first knew him at twenty-four. And this was even more true when he was about fifty.
0.52	He was never strong. And like many men with great minds, he was not careful enough to make the best of the health and strength he had.
0.53	He usually ate quickly. Even though he had weak digestion, he did not chew his food properly.
0.54	Also, when he felt fairly well, he would forget that his body was naturally weak. Then he would work with his mind beyond his strength.
0.55	I do not say this to blame that excellent man who is no longer with us. I, his friend, say it as a warning to other believers. For life, health, and strength of body or mind are entrusted to us as precious talents to be used for God.
0.56	He did not usually take care of his health, and he overworked his mind. No doubt this sometimes caused a measure of nervous depression. The reader will find signs of this in his diary. It makes Mr. Craik seem almost like a different man from the one people knew in his normal public life. There he was usually very cheerful.
0.57	Since I have mentioned his health, I must add this. I am fully convinced that God meant my friend’s natural weakness to be a special blessing to him.
0.58	Mr. Craik was a very humble man. It was his sincere and constant desire to use his mental powers for God’s glory. Yet no one could know him well without seeing his natural tendency. He tended to pursue the training of his mind too eagerly and with too much natural love for it. If his body had not been weak, this might have become a great trap for his inner life.
0.59	So, to hold him back, the Lord very mercifully gave him this powerful mind together with a weak body. That way he would not give himself too much to developing his mental powers.
0.60	I will add one more thing about his health.
0.61	I never knew anyone who by nature shrank from suffering as much as he did.
0.62	He often talked to me about this.
0.63	And yet for nearly seven months before he died, this very man suffered greatly. But he was also greatly upheld in his great suffering.
0.64	On Christmas Day 1865, I had more time than usual, so I sat by his bed longer than usual. Suddenly I remembered what he had so often talked to me about. So I told him that now the Lord’s strength was being shown in him, the very man who by nature shrank from pain and suffering.
0.65	He saw it and agreed.
0.66	And the Lord truly upheld His suffering servant greatly, right to the end.
0.67	He went through his sufferings without complaining, even though he prayed and longed to be set free from them.
0.68	And at last he was set free.
0.69	He fell asleep peacefully, leaning on Jesus.
0.70	I, his poor friend who writes this, am still here.
0.71	For now the Lord lets me go on serving Him on earth.
0.72	Christian reader, please pray that whether this time is long or short, I will be able to spend it truly for God’s honor.
