0.281	Some people think it is a very friendly thing to do for Christ to go to lots of religious services in a building that has been set apart as holy.
0.282	They go to the morning prayers and the evening prayers. They keep more feast days and fast days than anyone can count.
0.283	Some of us would rather hold our worship each day in our own homes. It will be a terrible thing if family prayer is dropped in favor of church services. But many people think little of praying together as a family. They feel they have to go to the parish church or to some other building made by human hands. But no one should imagine that this is how Jesus becomes our friend.
0.284	We must not stop meeting together, as some people do. It is good to meet with God’s people as often as we can. But you can still keep adding more sacraments and more ceremonies. You can go to this service and then that service, until your heart is worn out from grinding away at the mill of outward religion.
0.285	“You are Christ’s friends if you do whatever he commands you.” That is a better test than going to early communion or daily mass.
0.286	So it comes down to this, dear friends. We must do God’s will from the heart in everyday life. We must do it steadily, carefully, without giving up, and cheerfully, from the moment we wake up until we close our eyes at night.
0.287	About everything, ask yourself, “What would Jesus want me to do about this?
0.288	What does Christ teach about this?”
0.289	“Whether you eat or drink, or whatever you do, do it all in the name of the Lord Jesus, and give thanks to God the Father through him.”
0.290	You may be a household servant who can never give a pound to church work. But you are Jesus’ friend if you do whatever he commands you. You may be a housewife who cannot do anything outside your little family, because it needs all your attention. But if you are doing your duty to your children and doing what Christ commands you, you are one of Jesus’ friends.
0.291	You may be just an ordinary working man, or a shopkeeper with a small shop. Nobody has heard of you. But if you set an example of honesty, integrity, and godliness, and do everything for Christ because he has saved you, he will call you his friend.
0.292	What noble title could ever be as great as this?
0.293	Being Christ’s friend is worth more than being made a duke a thousand times over.
0.294	Here is what this all means in practice. Whenever you wonder what your duty is, test it with this one question: Will this be a friendly thing to do for Christ?
0.295	If I do this, will I be acting like Christ’s friend?
0.296	Will what I do bring him honor?
0.297	If so, I am glad.
0.298	If it will bring him shame, I will have nothing to do with it.
0.299	As far as you can, put each separate action on the scales. Let this be the weight you measure it with: Is this a friendly thing to do for my Redeemer?
0.300	I wish we all lived as if Jesus were always with us. I wish we lived as if we could see his wounds and look into his lovely face.
0.301	Suppose that tomorrow you are tempted, because someone asks you to do something questionable. Decide it this way. If Jesus could walk in at that very moment and show you his hands and his feet, how would you act in front of him?
0.302	Behave the way you would if you could truly feel that the One you love most was right there with you.
0.303	You would not do anything unkind to him, would you?
0.304	Of course you would not do anything to hurt him if you could see him in front of you.
0.305	Well then, keep him in front of you all the time.
0.306	The psalm writer cried out, “I have set the Lord always before me.”
0.307	You will need a great deal of the Holy Spirit’s anointing to do this.
0.308	May God give it to you.
0.309	Dear friends, live as if Christ might come right now and catch you in the very act.
0.310	Only do things you would not be ashamed of if, the very next moment, you saw the Lord sitting on his glorious throne and calling you to stand before him to be judged.
0.311	If you live like this, you will delight in peace that overflows.
0.312	“Then your walk with God will be close, / Your heart calm and at rest; / Then clearer light will show the road / That leads you to the Lamb.”
0.313	Obeying will make you glad, because you will enjoy the wonderful presence of your Lord. And in his presence you will find complete joy.
0.314	All wise people will envy you, because you will be loved by the Lord. Your path may not always be smooth, but it will always be safe. Jesus never leaves his friend. He will never leave you, but he will keep you right to the end.
0.315	May this be my happy experience and yours. Amen.
