0.248	Here is one more thing to think about. When Christ began to suffer for us, what a test of love that was!
0.249	I am sure there are many men who truly believe and who love their Savior. Yet they would shake with fear if their love were put to the test of suffering.
0.250	My brother, imagine that today you are taken into a dark prison cell of the Inquisition. Imagine that all the horrors of the Dark Ages have come back. You are led down a long, dark staircase and rushed along, and you have no idea where you are going. At last you reach a place deep down under the ground. All around you, hanging on the walls, you see pincers and torture tools of every kind and shape.
0.251	Two inquisitors are there, and they ask you, “Are you ready to give up your false beliefs and come back into the arms of the church?”
0.252	My brothers and sisters, I think you would have enough inner strength and grace to say, “I am not ready to deny my Savior.”
0.253	But then the pincers would start to tear your flesh. The hot coals would start to burn you. The rack would start to pull your bones out of their joints. Every torture tool would be doing its cruel, hellish work. Unless God’s supernatural hand were powerfully upon you, I am sure that in your weakness you would deny your Master. In that hour of danger you would abandon the Lord who bought you.
0.254	It is true that Christ’s love in our hearts is strong enough to carry us through, as long as his grace holds it up. But I am afraid that if many of us here today had no more love than we have now, we would come out of that Inquisition as miserable people who had given up the faith.
0.255	But now, think about Christ.
0.256	The tortures he faced were truly far more terrible.
0.257	No cruel torture machine of the Roman Catholics could ever match that awful agony that forced blood out like sweat from every pore of his skin.
0.258	Christ was whipped and he was crucified. But there were other sufferings that we could not see, and those were the very heart of his agony.
0.259	Now suppose Christ had said in that hour of terrible testing, “I want nothing to do with my disciples. I will not die.” Then he could have come down from the cross. And who could have blamed him for doing wrong?
0.260	He owed us nothing. We could do nothing for him.
0.261	The only ones he would be turning away were poor worms.
0.262	But our Master never once thought of turning his back on us, not even when the bloody sweat covered him like a cloak soaked in blood. NEVER.
0.263	Once he said, “My Father, if it is possible, let this cup pass from me.”
0.264	But there were always those words: “If it is possible.”
0.265	If there was a way to save us without it, then let the cup be taken away. But if not, may your will be done.
0.266	In Pilate’s hall you never hear him say one word that would make you think he was sorry he had agreed to such a costly sacrifice for us. His hands are pierced. He burns with fever. His tongue is as dry as a piece of broken pottery. His whole body is sinking down into the dust of death. Yet you never hear a groan or a scream that sounds as if he wants to turn back.
0.267	It is the cry of someone who is determined to keep going, even though he knows he must die along the way.
0.268	It was a love that even death could not stop. It won the victory over all the horrors of the grave.
0.269	So what do we have to say about this?
0.270	We live in gentler times. Are we going to give up our Master when we are tested and tempted because of him?
0.271	Young man at work in the workshop! People make fun of you because you follow the Savior. Will you turn away from Christ just because someone mocks you?
0.272	Young woman! People laugh at you because you openly say you believe in Christ. Will a laugh break the bond of love that ties your heart to him? All the roaring of hell could not pull his love away from you!
0.273	And some of you are suffering because you stand firm for something your faith teaches. Are people shutting you out? Won’t you put up with having your home stripped bare, and even with eating the bread of the poor, rather than bring shame on such a Lord?
0.274	With the help of God’s Spirit, won’t you leave this place making a vow and declaring it? Declare that in life, whether you end up poor or rich, and in death, whether it brings pain or anything else, you belong to the Lord and always must. For these words are written on your heart: “We love him because he first loved us.”
