0.1	“You are my friends if you do everything I command you.”—John 15:14.
0.2	Our Lord Jesus Christ is by far the best friend anyone could have. He is a friend when you need him, and a true friend in every way.
0.3	Socrates once said, “Friend! There is no such thing as a friend!” But Socrates did not know our Lord Jesus. If he had, he would have added, “except the Savior.”
0.4	The heart of our Lord Jesus burns with such friendship for us that every other kind of friendship looks like a weak candle next to the sun.
0.5	“No one has greater love than this: to give up his life for his friend.”
0.6	When an ordinary man dies for his friend, he has done the most he can possibly do. And yet he would have died someday anyway. So by dying for his friend, he is really just paying a debt a little early. It is a debt he would have had to pay a bit later in any case.
0.7	But Christ did not have to die at all. That is why his love and friendship stand completely alone.
0.8	He died when he did not need to die. He died in terrible pain when he could have lived in glory. No one has ever given such proof of friendship as this.
0.9	Let our Lord’s friendship toward us be the model for our friendship toward him.
0.10	It cannot be the same in every way, because we are in very different positions. His love will always be the love of the greater one for the smaller one. It is the love of a helper for someone in need. It is the love of the Redeemer for people he bought at a price. But apart from those differences, the whole tone and spirit of our Lord’s friendship is something we should copy. The closer we copy it, the better.
0.11	Friendship like his should be answered by a friendship from us that is warm, wholehearted, and ready to give things up.
0.12	I think that in this verse our Lord is not talking about him being our friend. He is talking about us being his friends.
0.13	He is “the friend of sinners.” But sinners are not his friends until their hearts are changed.
0.14	“You are my friends if you do everything I command you.” We are not his friends until then.
0.15	His love for us comes completely from himself. But friendship needs something from us too.
0.16	Friendship cannot be only one-sided. If only one side gives, it is better called mercy, grace, or kindness. Real friendship goes both ways.
0.17	You can do everything you want for someone and be as kind as can be, and he may still give nothing back. But friendship can only exist where the other person responds.
0.18	So the question in front of us is not whether Christ loves us, or whether he has pity on us. In another part of Scripture we read about “his great love with which he loved us even when we were dead in our wrongdoings and sins.”
0.19	He was a friend to us when we were his enemies. But that is not our subject right now. The question is whether we are friends to him. We must be made his friends if there is going to be a close friendship on both sides.
0.20	As I said before, friendship cannot be only one-sided. It is like a pair of scales. There must be something to balance the other side. The person who is loved must give kindness back.
0.21	Here Jesus tells us that if we want to be his friends, we must do whatever he commands us. And we must do it because we love him.
0.22	Dear friends, the greatest honor in the world is to be called a friend of Christ.
0.23	Surely no title is greater than the one Abraham had. He was called “The friend of God.”
0.24	Lord Brooke was so happy to be friends with Sir Philip Sydney that he ordered only these words to be carved on his tomb: “Here lies the friend of Sir Philip Sydney.”
0.25	There is something beautiful about that feeling. But it is a small thing compared with being able to say, “Here lives a friend of Christ.”
0.26	How amazing that he would come down so low as to call me “friend”!
0.27	If I truly believe in him, then he is my friend, and without that I would have no hope, now or ever. But more than that, in his overflowing grace he has chosen to count me as his friend. He has written my name on the honored list of his close friends. These friends are allowed to talk with him freely, like people who keep no secrets from each other. They pour out their hearts to him, and he hides nothing from them. He says, “If it were not so, I would have told you.”
0.28	Dear friends, think how this changes the way we see obeying Christ’s commands!
0.29	Even this early in the sermon, I cannot help pointing out how the teaching of our verse transforms obedience. It makes obedience the joy and glory of life.
0.30	Obedience is so precious. It is a better sign of friendship than having the greatest talents and influence.
0.31	Christ does not say, “You are my friends if you rise to an important position among people, or to honor in the church.”
0.32	No. However poor you are—and the people he said these words to were very poor—he says, “You are my friends if you do everything I command you.”
0.33	Obedience is better than money, and better than high position.
0.34	Jesus does not value his friends by what they own or what they wear. He values them by what they do.
0.35	We could say that all eleven apostles had remarkable gifts for their life’s work. Yet their Lord does not say, “You are my friends because I have given you the abilities to be apostles.”
0.36	Even to these leaders of his holy army, Jesus says plainly, “You are my friends if you do everything I command you.”
0.37	That is how your friendship will be tested: “If you obey, you are my friends.”
0.38	He says no less and no more to any of us today who long for the great honor of being inside the circle of his personal friends.
0.39	My brothers and sisters, you must obey your Master and Lord, and be eager to do it. Otherwise you are not his close friends.
0.40	This is the one thing that is absolutely needed, and only grace can give it to us.
0.41	Do we fight against this request?
0.42	Not at all! Our joy and delight is to carry the easy yoke of the One we love.
0.43	I. Let us look at the subject more closely. First, notice that OUR LORD HIMSELF TELLS US WHAT KIND OF OBEDIENCE HE WANTS from those who call themselves his friends.
0.44	True friends are eager to know what they can do to please the people they love. So let us gladly listen to what our wonderful Lord now says to the special circle of his chosen ones.
0.45	He asks every single one of us to obey.
0.46	None of us is excused from doing what he commands.
0.47	Whether our position is high or low, we must obey. If we have only one talent, we must obey. And if we have ten, we must still obey.
0.48	There can be no friendship with Christ unless each of us is willing to serve him loyally and with all our heart.
0.49	So let this message go around to all of you who carry the name of Jesus Christ. If you are counted among the friends of Jesus, you must take care to obey his good will yourself.
0.50	Do not forget that even the queen, standing at his right hand in gold from Ophir, is told, “He is your Lord, so worship him.”
0.51	Notice this: it must be active obedience.
0.52	“You are my friends if you do everything I command you.”
0.53	Some people think it is enough just to avoid what he forbids.
0.54	Staying away from evil is a big part of doing right. But it is not enough for friendship.
0.55	A man may say, “I am not a drunk. I am not dishonest. I am not sexually immoral. I do not break the Sabbath. I am not a liar.” So far, so good. But that kind of goodness is no better than that of the scribes and Pharisees, and they cannot enter the kingdom.
0.56	It is good if you do not break God’s law on purpose. But if you are going to be Christ’s friends, there must be much more than this.
0.57	It would be a poor kind of friendship that only said, “I am your friend, and to prove it, I don’t insult you, I don’t rob you, and I don’t say bad things about you.”
0.58	Surely friendship needs more positive proof than that.
0.59	The Lord Jesus Christ puts great weight on the things we should actively do. He says, “if you do everything I command you.”
0.60	On the last day he will say, “I was hungry, and you gave me food. I was thirsty, and you gave me something to drink.”
0.61	In that well-known twenty-fifth chapter of Matthew, nothing is said about the bad things people avoided. Instead, the good things they actually did are listed and described in detail.
0.62	You know the old English saying: “He is my friend who grinds at my mill.”
0.63	In other words, friendship shows itself by doing helpful things. Those things prove that it is real.
0.64	Nice words are just air. They mean nothing unless they are backed up by real acts of kindness.
0.65	Friendship cannot live on empty talk. It needs the solid bread of real action.
0.66	God’s inspired word says, “Show me proof of your love. Show it by doing everything I command you.”
0.67	The wording of the verse makes it clear that the obedience Christ expects from us is ongoing.
0.68	He does not say, “If you do it on Sundays, for example—if you do what I command you at church, that will be enough.” No, we are to remain in him and keep his laws all the way to the end.
0.69	I am not saying now that good works are the way to be saved. I am saying they are the evidence that we have fellowship with him. That is something quite different.
0.70	In every place, at all times, and in every situation, we must try to do what Jesus tells us. We should do it with a cheerful heart that honors him.
0.71	A godly wife gladly and lovingly follows her husband’s lead. In the same tender way, we must gladly follow Christ all our lives if we are his friends.
0.72	This obedience must also cover everything.
0.73	“You are my friends if you do everything I command you.”
0.74	As soon as a true friend of Christ finds out that something is a command, he says, “I will do it.” And he does it.
0.75	He does not pick and choose which commands he will keep and which he will ignore. That is doing what you want, not obeying.
0.76	I have known some people who claim to be Christians go badly wrong in this.
0.77	They have been very strict about one thing. They have blamed everyone who was not as strict as they were. They talked as if that one duty was the whole law.
0.78	Many people have made a big business of straining out gnats. They have bought a fine set of strainers with the tiniest holes to get every gnat out of their cup. But on another day, those same people opened their mouths and swallowed a whole camel without a second thought.
0.79	That will not do. The test is, “If you do everything I command you.”
0.80	I do not mean that little things do not matter. Far from it!
0.81	If Christ tells you to strain out a gnat, strain it out very carefully. Do not let even a tiny midge get past you if he tells you to remove it.
0.82	The smallest command of Christ may often be the most important. Let me tell you why.
0.83	Some things are big, and everyone can see they are big. For many reasons, even a fake Christian will take care of them. But the real test may be in the small things. Hypocrites do not bother to notice those, because no one would praise them for doing them.
0.84	This is where your love is proved.
0.85	Will you do the small thing for Jesus as well as the big thing?
0.86	Too many people say, “I don’t see the point of it. I can be saved without it. People have lots of different opinions about it.” And so on.
0.87	All of this comes from evil. It does not fit with the spirit of friendship with Christ, because love wants to please even in small things.
0.88	Is it what Christ wants?
0.89	Is it clearly a command in his word?
0.90	Then it is not your job to ask why or to argue about it.
0.91	Whether you are really following your Lord and Master may depend on those small, unimportant-looking things.
0.92	Imagine a servant girl in a house. She might put breakfast on the table and think she has done her job. But suppose her mistress told her to put the salt at the corner of the table, and she did not. She would be asked why she had not done it.
0.93	Suppose she answered her mistress, “I didn’t think it was needed. I put the breakfast in front of you. A little salt was too small a thing for me to bother about.”
0.94	Her mistress might answer, “But I told you to be sure to put out the salt dish.
0.95	Make sure you do it tomorrow.”
0.96	The next morning there is no salt again. The maid says she did not see the point of putting it on the table.
0.97	Her mistress is unhappy. She tells the girl that what she wants must be done.
0.98	Wouldn’t she be a very foolish and annoying girl if she refused, just because she did not see the point?
0.99	I think the young woman would probably have to find another job before long, because that kind of behavior is very annoying.
0.100	It is the same with people who claim to be Christians and say, “I have taken care of the main things. What I skip is only a small matter.”
0.101	People like that are not even good servants. They can never be friends.
0.102	Dear brothers and sisters, I beg you, work hard at obeying in everything.
0.103	“Whatever he tells you to do, do it.”
0.104	Only by seriously trying to do everything he wants can you live in happy friendship with him and truly be his friends.
0.105	Notice carefully that we are to obey as if we were doing it for Christ himself.
0.106	Put the emphasis on the little word “I”: “You are my friends if you do everything I command you.”
0.107	We are to do these things because Jesus commands them.
0.108	Our Lord is a royal person. Doesn’t that show very clearly how necessary it is to obey?
0.109	When we refuse to obey, we are refusing to do what the Lord himself commands.
0.110	The Lord Jesus Christ is the Son of God and our Redeemer. When someone refuses to obey him, it is treason.
0.111	How can rebels against the King be His Majesty’s friends?
0.112	The commands in Scripture are not human rules or the orders of angels. They are the laws of Christ. How dare we look down on them?
0.113	We are to do what is right because Jesus commands us, and because we love to do what pleases him. There can be no friendship without this.
0.114	Oh, how we need grace to serve the Lord with gladness!
0.115	To finish this first point: it seems our Lord wants us to obey him in a friendly spirit.
0.116	If we obeyed Christ only because we were forced to, out of fear of pain and punishment, it would be worth nothing as proof of friendship. Anyone can see that.
0.117	He is not talking about slaves, but about friends. He does not want us to do our duties because we are afraid of punishment or because we want a reward. What he can accept from his friends must grow out of love.
0.118	His will must be our law because we delight in him.
0.119	Some who claim to be Christians have to be whipped into doing their duties. They need exciting sermons and thrilling meetings, and they have to live under pressure. But those who are Christ’s friends need nothing to push them except love.
0.120	“The love of Christ drives us on.”
0.121	True hearts do what Jesus tells them without being whipped and chased, pushed and forced.
0.122	Goodness that is forced is ruined while it is being made, just as many clay pots crack while they are being baked.
0.123	The wine of our obedience must flow freely from the ripe grapes of the soul’s love. Otherwise it will not be good enough for the King’s cup.
0.124	When duty becomes a delight, and God’s commands are as sweet as his promises, then we are Christ’s friends. Not before.
0.125	II. So I have explained what kind of obedience Christ asks for. Now, in the second place, notice that our Lord leads us to conclude from this verse that THOSE WHO DO NOT OBEY HIM ARE NOT HIS FRIENDS.
0.126	He may still look on them with kindness and become their friend by changing their hearts and forgiving their sins. But for now they are not his friends. A man who does not obey Christ does not give the Savior his rightful place, and that is an unfriendly thing to do.
0.127	If I have a friend who is honored somewhere, I make very sure that he gets proper respect from me.
0.128	If he is above me in rank, I am careful that he does not think I am pushy. I do not want him to think I would take unfair advantage of his kindness.
0.129	I will think more highly of him than anyone else does.
0.130	The person who is truly Christ’s friend loves to honor him as a great king. But the person who will not give him his rights as King is a traitor, not a friend.
0.131	Our Lord is the head over everything for his church. That means the members of his body gladly obey him. Disobedience refuses to give Christ the honor of being the holy Head, which is his right over every member of his spiritual body. That is not how a true friend acts.
0.132	How can you be his friend if you will not accept his rule?
0.133	It is useless to boast that you trust in his cross if you do not honor his crown.
0.134	Anyone who does not keep his commands cannot be Christ’s friend, because he does not think the same way as Christ. That is obvious.
0.135	Can two people walk together unless they agree?
0.136	True friendship does not exist between people who disagree about the most basic things. And there can be no agreement between Jesus Christ and the person who will not obey him. That person is really saying, “Lord Jesus, I hate your pure and holy will. Your kind and gracious commands make me tired.”
0.137	What kind of friendship could that be?
0.138	They do not think alike. Christ is for holiness; this man is for sin. Christ is for a spiritual mind; this man’s mind is on worldly things. Christ is for love; this man is for himself. Christ is for giving glory to the Father; this man is for honoring himself. How can they be friends when they are completely opposite in their plans, their goals, and their spirit?
0.139	It is not possible.
0.140	The person who does not obey Christ cannot be his friend, even if he claims to be.
0.141	He may be a very important and loud churchgoer, and for that very reason he may be even more of an enemy of the cross. When people see him living for his own selfish desires, they cry out, “You were with Jesus of Nazareth too!” They blame all his faults on his religion. And right away they start to speak evil of Christ’s name.
0.142	Nothing holds back our Lord’s cause more than the inconsistent behavior of people who claim to be his friends.
0.143	Suppose you or I had a very close friend who was found drunk in the street, or caught breaking into a house or stealing. Wouldn’t we feel ashamed of what he did?
0.144	When he was taken before the judge, would you like people to say, “This man is the best friend of So-and-so”?
0.145	Oh, you would hide your face and beg your neighbors never to mention it.
0.146	If a man like that were known as your friend, it would damage your name and your reputation.
0.147	We say this with tears: the name of Jesus Christ is damaged, and his honor is stained in people’s eyes, by many who call themselves Christians but do not have the spirit of Christ. People like that cannot be his dear companions.
0.148	How sad are the wounds Jesus has received in the house of his friends!
0.149	When Caesar fell, it was his friends who stabbed him with their daggers!
0.150	Where he had trusted, he found betrayal.
0.151	The very people whose lives he had spared did not spare his life.
0.152	How terrible it will be for those who dress up as Christians but crucify the Lord all over again and shame him in public.
0.153	Nothing stings Christ’s cheek like a Judas kiss, and he has had many of those.
0.154	Jesus cannot claim those who disobey him as his friends, because that would truly dishonor him.
0.155	There was a time—I don’t know if it is still true—when any man who wanted to be made a count or get a noble title only had to pay a certain amount of money into the Pope’s treasury in Rome. Then he could be made a nobleman right away.
0.156	Titles bought like that brought no honor either to the people who gave them or to the people who got them.
0.157	Whatever the man who pretends to stand in Christ’s place may do, our Lord himself does not sell honors.
0.158	The title “friends of Jesus” belongs only to people of a certain character. There is no other way to get it.
0.159	His friends are the people who obey him: “If you love me, keep my commands.”
0.160	He gives this noble title to every believer who lovingly follows him. But he writes no one else’s name on his list of friends.
0.161	Can’t you see that his honor demands this?
0.162	Would you want our Lord to stand up and say, “The drunk is my friend”?
0.163	Would you want to hear him say, “That cheating bankrupt is my close companion”?
0.164	Would you want Jesus to call wicked and godless people his friends?
0.165	People judge a man by the company he keeps. What would people think of Jesus if his close friends were men with loose morals and wrong principles?
0.166	Going among such people to help them is one thing. Making them his friends is something else.
0.167	Where there is no family bond, no likeness, and nothing in common, the lovely flower of friendship cannot put down roots.
0.168	So we may also read the verse the other way around: “You are not my friends if you do not do what I command you.”
0.169	III. Here is my third point: THOSE WHO OBEY CHRIST BEST ARE THE CLOSEST TO HIM.
0.170	He seems to say, “You are my friends, and you live close to me, when you obey quickly. Then you enjoy real, personal friendship with me and talk with me every day.”
0.171	Brothers and sisters, some of you know from your own experience that you cannot walk closely with Christ in holy fellowship unless you keep his commands.
0.172	We feel no closeness between our souls and Christ when we know we have done wrong and are not sorry for it.
0.173	Suppose we know we have gone wrong, as we often do. Our hearts break because we have hurt the One we love. We go and tell him how sad we are and confess our sin. Then we are still his friends. He kisses away our tears and says, “I know how weak you are. I gladly wipe away your wrongs.
0.174	Our friendship is not broken. I will still show myself to you.”
0.175	But when we know we are wrong and our hearts do not soften at all, then we cannot pray. We cannot talk with the One we love. We cannot walk with him as his friends.
0.176	Closeness with Jesus ends when we get comfortable with sin we know about.
0.177	And if we know something is wrong but keep on doing it, there can be no happy friendship between us and our Savior.
0.178	Dear brother, suppose your conscience has told you to give up a certain thing, but you keep on doing it. The next time you kneel to pray, you will feel held back. You may sit down with your Bible open, hoping to have the kind of closeness with Christ you used to enjoy. But you will find that he has pulled back and will not let you find him.
0.179	Is that any surprise?
0.180	If sin is lying at the door, how can the Lord smile on us?
0.181	Hidden sin will poison our fellowship with him right at the source.
0.182	If you and Christ are quarreling, and you are holding tightly to something he hates, how can you enjoy friendship with him?
0.183	He tells you that sin is a poisonous snake that will kill you. But you answer, “It is a necklace of jewels.” So you put it around your neck.
0.184	Are you surprised that, because he loves you, he is grieved by such crazy behavior?
0.185	Oh, do not hurt yourself like this.
0.186	Do not treat his wise commands with such contempt.
0.187	Some Christians will never have full fellowship with Christ because they do not bother to study his word and find out what he wants.
0.188	Every Christian should take it seriously to find out what his Lord wants on every subject, especially when he is just starting out.
0.189	Half the Christians in the world are happy just to ask, “What is our church’s rule?”
0.190	That is not the question. The real question is, “What is Christ’s rule?”
0.191	Some people say, “My father and mother did it this way before me.”
0.192	I partly understand that feeling. Honoring your parents is admirable. But in spiritual things we are to call no one “father.” We must make the Lord Jesus our master and our example.
0.193	God has not put your conscience in your mother’s care. He has not given your father the right or the power to answer for you. Everyone must carry his own load and give his own account to God. So each one of you, search the Scriptures for yourselves. Follow no rule except the one God has inspired.
0.194	Get your light straight from the sun.
0.195	Let the holy Scriptures be the rule you never question for what you believe and how you live. If there is anything you are unsure about, I urge you, by your loyalty to Christ, if you are his friends, try to find out what he wants. And once you are sure about it, pay no attention to any human leaders or important people who go against his law.
0.196	Do not question, do not hesitate, and do not delay.
0.197	If he commands you, do what he wants, even if the gates of hell thunder against you.
0.198	Unless you are determined to please him in everything, you are not his friends. Or at least, you are not the kind of friends who enjoy his friendship.
0.199	Sin will disturb the closeness between you and Christ. You cannot rest your head on his chest and say, “Lord, I know what you want, but I am not going to do it.”
0.200	Could you look up into that dear face—the face that was once so badly wounded and is now more beautiful than heaven itself—and say, “My Lord, I love you, but I will not do everything you want”?
0.201	If you give in to that rebellious spirit, he will discipline you for it, precisely because he loves you so much.
0.202	It is a horrible evil. Holy eyes cannot bear it.
0.203	He is a jealous lover. He will not put up with sin, because sin is his rival.
0.204	“You are my friends if you do everything I command you.”
0.205	Oh, dear friends, pay attention to this!
0.206	In all the hard times, the losses, and the trials of life, there is no better comfort than knowing that you have tried to do your Lord’s will.
0.207	If a man suffers for Christ while he keeps walking the path of holiness, he can be glad about that suffering.
0.208	Losses suffered while standing up for what is right and true are really gains.
0.209	Jesus is never closer to his friends than when they bravely put up with shame for him.
0.210	If we get into trouble through our own foolishness, the pain goes deep into our hearts. But if we are wounded fighting our Lord’s battles, the scars are a mark of honor.
0.211	For his sake we can accept insults and wear them like a crown of honor.
0.212	Jesus loves to be the Companion of those who are rejected by their family and friends because they stand for the truth and stay faithful to his cross.
0.213	People may call the faithful person a fanatic, a crazy enthusiast, and all kinds of ugly names. But there is no need to worry about that. The honor of being Christ’s friend is worth far more than whatever the world thinks.
0.214	When we follow the Lamb wherever he goes, the results are his responsibility, not ours.
0.215	“Though my way is dark, since he is my guide, / My part is to obey, his part to provide.”
0.216	What happens as a result of our doing right is up to God.
0.217	Hate the idea that you may do a small wrong for the sake of a great good.
0.218	I have heard men say—yes, even Christian men—“If I followed my beliefs strictly, I would have to leave a job where I do a lot of good. So I stay where I am and keep my conscience as quiet as I can.
0.219	If I put everything I believe into practice, I would lose chances to do good that I have now. So I stay in a position that I could not defend for any other reason.”
0.220	Is that what Jesus thinks?
0.221	Is that how you show kindness to your friend?
0.222	How many people bow down in the temple of the idol Rimmon and hope the Lord will forgive them for it!
0.223	We will see whether he does.
0.224	We must not do evil so that good may come from it.
0.225	If I knew that doing right would shake this whole island, I would still have to do it. With God’s help, I would do it. And if I heard that doing one wrong thing seemed likely to bless a whole nation, I would still have no right to do wrong for that reason.
0.226	No bribe of doing more good should be allowed to buy our conscience.
0.227	Right is right, and it will always end in blessing. Wrong is wrong, and it will always end in a curse, even if for a while it looks like something wonderfully good.
0.228	Didn’t the devil lead our first parents astray by suggesting that great good would come from their disobedience?
0.229	“Your eyes will be opened, and you will be like gods,” said the great deceiver.
0.230	Wouldn’t it be a wonderful thing for human beings to become gods?
0.231	“Of course,” says Eve. “I would not want to miss this chance.
0.232	The people who will be born after me would blame me if I did.
0.233	I would not want people to stay lower creatures because I did nothing.”
0.234	For the sake of the good she was promised, she dared to do evil.
0.235	Thousands of people sin because it seems so useful, so wise, so necessary, and so sure to turn out well.
0.236	Listen to what Christ says: “You are my friends if you do everything I command you.”
0.237	If you do evil so that good may come, you cannot walk with him. But if your heart is set on his laws, you will find that he loves you and comes to live with you.
0.238	IV. Fourth, our verse teaches us that THE FRIENDLIEST THING A PERSON CAN DO FOR JESUS IS TO OBEY HIM: “You are my friends if you do everything I command you.”
0.239	Rich men have thought that the friendliest thing they could do for Christ was to give a huge amount of money to build a church, or to start homes for the poor, or schools.
0.240	If they are believers and have done this to obey Christ’s law about managing what he has given them, they have done well. The more gifts like that, the better. But when big, impressive gifts are given to show off, or because people think they will earn credit with God by giving a lot of money, then the whole thing is unacceptable.
0.241	If a man gave all the wealth of his house for love, it would be completely scorned.
0.242	Jesus does not ask us to spend lots of money. He asks for us.
0.243	He has made this the sign of true love: “If you do everything I command you.”
0.244	“Obeying is better than sacrifice, and listening is better than the fat of rams.”
0.245	However much we are able to give, we ought to give it, and give it cheerfully. But if we think any amount of giving can take the place of obeying him ourselves, we are badly mistaken.
0.246	Bringing our money without giving our hearts is like giving someone the jewelry box and stealing the jewel.
0.247	How dare we bring our offering with a hand that is diseased with leprosy?
0.248	We must first be washed clean ourselves in the blood that pays for sin before we can be accepted. And our hearts must be changed before our offering can be pure in God’s sight.
0.249	Other people have thought they could show their friendship to Christ by some remarkable way of punishing themselves.
0.250	Roman Catholics, especially long ago, believed that suffering and earning credit with God went together. So men tortured themselves to try to please God.
0.251	They went for many days without washing themselves or their clothes. They imagined this gave them the “smell of holiness.”
0.252	I do not believe that Jesus thinks a man is more his friend because he is dirty.
0.253	Some have worn a shirt made of scratchy hair, or a belt of chain that rubbed their skin raw.
0.254	I do not think the kind Lord Jesus considers these things to be acts of friendship.
0.255	Ask any kind-hearted person if he would be pleased to know that a friend was wearing a scratchy hair shirt for his sake. He would answer, “Please let the poor person wear whatever is most comfortable. That will please me most.”
0.256	The loving Jesus takes no pleasure in pain and discomfort. Starving and wearing down the body is not something he taught.
0.257	John the Baptist may have lived a very harsh, simple life, but Jesus certainly did not. He came eating and drinking, a man among other people.
0.258	He did not come to demand the hard life of a hermit or a monk. If he had, he would never have been seen at feasts.
0.259	When we hear about the nuns of St. Ann sleeping sitting straight up in their coffins, it gives us no special pleasure. A kind heart would beg them to go to bed.
0.260	Some time ago I toured a monastery. Over each bed hung a small whip with many tails, called a cat-o’-nine-tails. I truly hope each owner used his to his own satisfaction. But I did not copy the idea and buy a couple for my sons. And I have not sent one to each of my special friends either, because I would never ask them to whip themselves to prove their friendship.
0.261	Our Lord cannot be pleased by pain that people invent and inflict on themselves.
0.262	These things are worship that people make up for themselves, and that is not worship at all.
0.263	You can go without food for forty days if you want, but you will not earn any credit with God by doing it.
0.264	Jesus Christ has not asked for this as the measure of friendship, and he will not count us as his friends because of it.
0.265	He says, “You are my friends if you do everything I command you.” But he does not command you to starve yourself, or wear rough sackcloth, or lock yourself away in a little room. Pride invents these things, but grace teaches us to obey.
0.266	Some people have thought that the highest form of holy service would be to join religious brotherhoods and sisterhoods.
0.267	They imagined they would truly be Christ’s friends if they joined “the Society of Jesus.”
0.268	I have sometimes asked myself whether it might be a good idea to form a group of Christian men joined together to live only for Jesus and to give themselves completely to his work. But the New Testament certainly never pictures special societies, sisterhoods, or brotherhoods apart from the great family of the church of God. You will not find any hint of Franciscans or Dominicans there.
0.269	All godly women were sisters of mercy, and all Christlike men belonged to the Society of Jesus. But we read nothing about the vows of monks and nuns.
0.270	Anything that Scripture does not command is superstition.
0.271	We are to worship God the way he wants, not the way we want. Suppose I gave myself completely to what Roman Catholics called “the religious life.” Suppose I got away from ordinary people and tried to spend all my time alone in deep thought. There would still be nothing to it, because the Lord Jesus never asked me to do it.
0.272	What he does ask is that we do whatever he commands us.
0.273	Why do people try to do things he never commanded?
0.274	Any schoolteacher will let me ask him about this.
0.275	Suppose he said to a boy in class, “Now it is time for you to get your slate and do your arithmetic.” But instead, the boy got out his handwriting book. Wouldn’t the teacher ask him whether he had understood?
0.276	And if a few minutes later he finds the boy writing, does he say, “You have written that line very nicely”?
0.277	Not at all. It hardly matters whether the writing is good or bad. Writing at all, when he was told to do math, is openly disobeying.
0.278	It is the same with you and me.
0.279	We may do something else and do it wonderfully well. Other people may say, “What a godly man he is!” But if we do not do what the Lord wants, we will not be his friends.
0.280	We may wear a piece of leather for a sandal and rough brown cloth for clothes, and give up boots and coats. But there is nothing holy about clothing. What really counts is doing what Christ has commanded.
