0.1	“They hated me for no reason.”—John 15:25
0.2	Most people agree that the words our Savior quotes here come from Psalm 35:19. There David is speaking about himself first, but he is also speaking ahead of time about the Savior. He says, “Don’t let my enemies celebrate over me. Don’t let those who hate me for no reason wink at each other in scorn.”
0.3	Our Savior says those words apply to him. So he is really telling us that many of the Psalms are Messianic—they are about the Messiah. That means Dr. Hawker was not wrong when he said he believed the Psalms were about the Savior, even if he may have pushed that truth too far.
0.4	So when we read the Psalms, it is a good plan to keep seeing them as being not so much about David, but about the one David pictured ahead of time: Jesus Christ, David’s Lord.
0.5	No one was ever more lovely than the Savior. It would seem almost impossible not to love him.
0.6	At first glance, it would certainly seem much harder to hate him than to love him.
0.7	And yet, as lovable as he was—in fact, “completely lovely”—no one ever met hatred so early. No one ever suffered such constant persecution as he did.
0.8	As soon as he is born into the world, King Herod’s sword is ready to kill him. The innocent babies of Bethlehem were horribly murdered. That gave a sad early taste of what Christ would suffer, and of the hatred people would pour out on the head of the one who was marked out to suffer.
0.9	From his first moment until the cross—except for a short quiet time while he was a child—it seemed as if the whole world had teamed up against him. Everyone seemed to be trying to destroy him.
0.10	That hatred showed itself in different ways. Sometimes it was open action. Once they took him to the edge of a hill and wanted to throw him off. Another time they picked up stones to stone him, because he said that Abraham had longed to see his day, and did see it, and was glad.
0.11	At other times the hatred came out in lies, like this: “He is a drunk who loves his wine, a friend of tax collectors and sinners.” Or it came out in looks of contempt, as when they eyed him with suspicion because he ate with tax collectors and sinners and sat down to eat without washing his hands.
0.12	At other times the hatred stayed completely in their thoughts. They said to themselves, “This man is insulting God,” because he said, “Your sins are forgiven.”
0.13	But almost all the time there was hatred toward Christ. Once they took hold of him and wanted to make him king. A shallow wave of popular cheering would have carried him onto a shaky throne. But even then a hidden hatred was there. It was kept down only by the loaves and fishes. All it needed was for the priests to offer the same amount of loaves and fishes, and it would turn into the cry, “Crucify him, crucify him!” instead of the shout, “Hosanna! Blessed is the one who comes in the name of the Lord.”
0.14	People from every level of society hated him.
0.15	Most people meet with some opposition. But often it comes from just one group, and there are other groups who respect them.
0.16	A crowd-pleasing leader whom the poor admire has to expect the rich to look down on him. And the one who works for the upper class will, of course, be scorned by ordinary people.
0.17	But here was a man who walked among the people and loved them. He spoke to rich and poor as if they were on the same level in his blessed eyes—and in fact they are. Yet every group joined together in hating him. The priests shouted him down because he ruined their teachings. The nobles wanted to kill him because he talked about being a king. And then there were the poor. They admired how well he spoke, and often they would have bowed down and worshiped him because of the amazing things he did. Yet even they were led by men who should have guided them better, and for reasons only they know, they plotted to kill him. They finished their guilt by nailing him to the cross. Then they shook their heads at him and told him that if he could build a temple in three days, he should save himself and come down from the cross.
0.18	Christ was the one people hated, lied about and mocked. He was “despised and rejected by people, a man of sorrows who knew grief well.”
0.19	This morning we will try to do three things. First, we will show that the Savior was right to say he was hated for no reason. Second, we will think about the sin of people—that they hated him for no reason. Third, we will give Christ’s own people a lesson or two that they can learn from the fact that their Savior was hated for no reason.
0.20	I. So first, dear friends, let us SHOW THAT WHAT THE SAVIOR SAID IS TRUE: “They hated me for no reason.”
0.21	Here is our point. If we leave aside the fact that people are sinful and Christ is pure, there is certainly no reason at all to be found for why the world should have hated him.
0.22	First, let us look at Christ as a person.
0.23	When he lived in this world as a man, was there anything about him that would naturally make anyone hate him?
0.24	Notice that almost everything that makes people hate each other was missing in him.
0.25	To begin with, Christ had no high rank that would make people jealous.
0.26	Everyone knows this: however good a man is, if riches or a title raise him even a little above other people, then people may respect him one by one, but the crowd often speaks against him. They do it not so much because of who he is, but because of his rank and his title.
0.27	It seems natural for people in a crowd to look down on nobles. Each person on his own thinks it is a wonderful thing to know a lord. But put people together, and they will look down on lords and bishops and speak very lightly of rulers and people in power.
0.28	But Christ had none of the outward signs of rank. He had no fancy carriage, no long official sleeves, nothing that lifted him above others. When he went out, no heralds walked with him, and there was no grand show to honor him.
0.29	In fact, you would think the way Christ looked would naturally have made people feel sorry for him.
0.30	Instead of being raised above people, in a way he seemed to be below them. Foxes had holes and birds had nests, but the Son of Man had no place to lay his head.
0.31	Many a man who is against the upper classes has shouted angrily at the archbishop as he went past Lambeth Palace. But would he curse him or look down on him if he were told that the archbishop had no place to lay his head, and simply worked hard for the sake of the truth, with no reward?
0.32	So the jealousy that rank and position naturally stir up could not have worked against Christ. There was nothing about his clothes to draw attention. They were the clothes of a country worker from Galilee—“made in one piece, woven from top to bottom.”
0.33	And there was nothing about his social rank either.
0.34	He may have come from an ancient royal family, but that royal line seemed to have died out. He was known only as the carpenter’s son.
0.35	So in that way, they hated him “for no reason.”
0.36	Many people seem to feel jealous of those who rule or govern over them.
0.37	Just the fact that a man has authority over me stirs up bad feelings in me. I begin to look at him with suspicion simply because he has that authority.
0.38	Some people naturally go along and obey simply because the rule has been made. Rulers and authorities are set in place, and these people submit to them for the Lord’s sake. But most people, especially in these days when so many want to get rid of kings, seem to have a natural urge to fight against authority, simply because it is authority.
0.39	I believe that in some countries, like France, even if the rulers and governments were changed every month, there would be just as many revolutions under one government as under another. In fact, people there hate all government. They want to live without laws, so that everyone can do whatever seems right to him.
0.40	But this did not apply to Christ. He was not a king. He did not take control over the crowds.
0.41	It is true that he was Lord over storms and seas. It is true that he could give orders to demons, and if he had wanted to, people would have had to obey him. But he did not take power over them.
0.42	He gathered no armies. He announced no laws. He did not make himself an important man in the country. As far as any authority he used over them was concerned, the people did just what they liked.
0.43	In fact, instead of putting hard laws on them, he seemed to loosen their strict system. When the woman caught in adultery was brought to him—a woman who would otherwise have been put to death—he said, “I don’t condemn you either.”
0.44	To some extent he also eased the strict rules about the Sabbath, which in some ways were too heavy a burden. He said, “The Sabbath was made for people.”
0.45	So surely they hated him “for no reason.”
0.46	Some people make others dislike them because they are proud.
0.47	I know some men I would have liked very much if the stiffness had been taken out of them. I would really feel for them and admire them if they were even a little willing to come down to other people’s level. But they seem to walk around the world acting so proud!
0.48	Maybe they are not really proud—very likely they are not. But as an old preacher said, “When we see a fox’s tail sticking out of a hole, we naturally expect that the fox is in there.”
0.49	And somehow the human mind cannot stand pride. We always push back against it.
0.50	But there was nothing like that in our Savior.
0.51	How humble he was!
0.52	Why, he was willing to lower himself to do anything.
0.53	He washed his disciples’ feet. When he walked among people, he never showed off, as if to say to them, “Look at my talent! Look at my power, my rank, my importance! Get out of my way—I am greater than you.”
0.54	No, he sits down right there with them.
0.55	There is Matthew the tax collector sitting beside him. Jesus does not think it will hurt him to be near the tax collector, even though he is the worst of sinners. There is a prostitute, and he speaks to her. There is another woman who has seven demons, and he drives the demons out of her. There is someone else with leprosy, and he even touches that person. All of this shows how humble he was, and that there was no pride in him at all.
0.56	Oh, if only you could have seen the Savior! He was the perfect example of humility!
0.57	He didn’t have any of your fancy manners and polite rules. He had the true politeness that is friendly to everyone, because it is kind and loving to everyone.
0.58	There was no pride in the Savior, so there was nothing about him that would make people angry for that reason.
0.59	So they hated him “for no reason.”
0.60	There are other people you just can’t help disliking, because they are so snappy, so prickly and so angry. They look as if they were born on some terribly dark, stormy day, and as if a lot of vinegar was mixed in when their bodies were made.
0.61	You can’t sit with them for long without feeling that you have to keep your tongue on a tight leash. You can’t talk freely, or there will be a quarrel, because they will treat you as guilty over a single word.
0.62	You might say, “That man is no doubt a good man. But honestly, I can’t stand that temper of his.”
0.63	And when a man with a nasty, sour personality is well known to the public, people feel like disliking him.
0.64	But there was nothing like this in our Savior.
0.65	“When people insulted him, he did not insult them back.” If people spat in his face, he said nothing to them. When they hit him, he did not curse them. He sat still and put up with their scorn.
0.66	He walked through the world while people kept pouring scorn and shame on him. But “he did not answer a word.” He was never angry.
0.67	If you read the Savior’s life, you won’t find him speaking one angry word—except the words of holy anger that he poured like boiling oil on the heads of the proud Pharisees. Then his anger really did boil, but it was holy anger.
0.68	With such a loving, kind and gentle spirit, you would think he could have gone through the world as easily as anyone could.
0.69	But in spite of all that, they hated him.
0.70	We can truly say, “They hated him for no reason.”
0.71	There is another kind of people you can hardly help disliking: selfish people.
0.72	We know some people who are very good-tempered and very honest and fair. But they are so selfish!
0.73	When you are with them, you feel that they are only your friends for what they can get from you. When you have been useful to them, they will just put you aside and look for someone else.
0.74	Even when they try to do good, their good deed has a hidden purpose. But somehow they always get found out. No one in the world is disliked by the public more than a person who lives a selfish life.
0.75	One of the most miserable people in the universe is the selfish miser. He gets kicked around the world like a football.
0.76	But there was nothing selfish in Christ. Whatever he did, he did for others.
0.77	He had an amazing power to do miracles, but he would not even turn a stone into bread for himself. He saved his miracle-working power for others. There did not seem to be one bit of selfishness in his whole nature.
0.78	In fact, the story of his life could be written very briefly: “He saved others, but he did not save himself.”
0.79	He walked around and touched the poorest people, the lowest people, and the sickest people. He did not care what people might say about him. He did not seem to care at all about fame, or importance, or comfort, or honor.
0.80	He did not care in the least about his own comfort, either in body or in mind.
0.81	Christ’s life was one of giving himself up for others. But he did it so easily that it did not even seem like a sacrifice.
0.82	Oh, dear friends, in that way they certainly hated Christ for no reason. There was nothing in Christ to make them hate him. In fact, it was the other way around: there was everything in him to make the whole world love and respect someone so completely unselfish.
0.83	There is another kind of people I don’t like: people who are fakes. In fact, I think I could even live with a selfish man if I knew he was selfish. But the hypocrite—don’t let him come anywhere near me!
0.84	If a public figure is a hypocrite even once, the world will hardly ever trust him again. They will hate him.
0.85	But Christ could not be blamed for this at all. If they hated him, it was not for that, because there was never a more genuine man than Christ.
0.86	You know, he was called the child Jesus. A child says openly what is on his mind. He holds nothing back and plays no tricks. It was just like that with Jesus. There was nothing fake about him and no deceit.
0.87	He never changed. He was “without any change, not even a shadow of turning.”
0.88	Whatever the world may say about Christ, people never said they believed he was a hypocrite. Among all the lies they told about him, they never questioned that he was sincere.
0.89	If they could have shown that he had really been fooling them, they might have had some reason to hate him. But he lived in the bright sunlight of sincerity. He walked on the very mountaintop, where people watched him all the time.
0.90	He could not be a hypocrite, and people knew he could not. And yet people hated him.
0.91	Truly, my friends, look at the character of Christ. Look at how lovely it is, how kind, how sincere, how devoted, how eager he was to do people good. Then you must say, “They really did hate him for no reason.” There was nothing in who Christ was that should make people hate him.
0.92	Next, was there anything in Christ’s mission that could make people hate him?
0.93	Suppose they had asked him, “Why have you come from heaven?” Would there have been anything in his answer to make them angry and full of hate?
0.94	I don’t think so. Why did he come?
0.95	First of all, he came to explain mysteries. He came to tell them the meaning of the lamb that was sacrificed, the meaning of the scapegoat, and what the ark, the bronze snake and the jar of manna were meant to show. He came to tear open the curtain of the Most Holy Place and to show people secrets they had never seen before.
0.96	Should they have hated someone who lifted the curtain of mystery, made dark things clear, and explained riddles?
0.97	Should they have hated the one who taught them what Abraham had longed to see—things that prophets and kings had longed to know but died without knowing?
0.98	Was there anything in that to make them hate him?
0.99	What else did he come for?
0.100	He came to earth to bring back people who had wandered away. Is there anything in that which should make people hate Christ?
0.101	He came to change the drunkard, to win back the prostitute, to gather in the tax collectors and sinners, and to bring runaway sons back to their father’s house. Surely everyone who wants to help others should agree with that goal! It is the very reason our governments are set up—to bring people into a better condition. So if Christ came for that purpose, was there anything in that to make people hate him?
0.102	What else did he come for?
0.103	He came to heal the diseases of the body. Is that a fair reason to hate someone?
0.104	Should I hate a doctor who goes around healing every kind of disease for free?
0.105	Are deaf ears opened? Are mute mouths made to speak? Are the dead raised? Are the blind made to see, and are widows blessed by getting their sons back?
0.106	Are these reasons for a man to be hated?
0.107	Surely he could well say, “For which of these good deeds are you stoning me?
0.108	If I have done good things, why do you speak against me?”
0.109	But none of these works were the reason people hated him. They hated him for no reason.
0.110	And did he come to earth to die, so that sinners would not have to die?
0.111	Was that a reason to hate him?
0.112	Should I hate the Savior because he came to put out the flames of hell for me?
0.113	Should I look down on the one who let his Father’s flaming sword be put out in his own life’s blood?
0.114	Should I be angry with the one who took my place—who takes my sin and my griefs on himself and carries my sorrows?
0.115	Should I hate and despise the man who loved me more than he loved himself—who loved me so much that he went down into the dark grave to save me?
0.116	Are these reasons to hate someone?
0.117	Surely his mission should have made us sing his praise forever and join the angels with their harps in their joyful songs.
0.118	“They hated me for no reason.”
0.119	But one more thing: was there anything in Christ’s teaching that should have made us hate him?
0.120	No, we answer. There was nothing in his teaching that should have made people hate him.
0.121	Take his teaching about how to live.
0.122	Didn’t he teach us to treat others the way we would want them to treat us?
0.123	Didn’t he also stand for everything that is lovely and honorable and well spoken of?
0.124	Wasn’t his teaching the very heart of goodness? Even if goodness itself had written it, it could not have written such a perfect set of lovely morals and excellent virtues.
0.125	Was it his teaching about right and wrong that people hated?
0.126	He taught that rich and poor must stand on the same level. He taught that his good news was not to be kept for one nation, but was to spread gloriously until it covered the world.
0.127	Maybe this was one of the main reasons they hated him. But surely there was no good reason in this for them to be angry.
0.128	There was nothing in Christ to make people hate him.
0.129	“They hated him for no reason.”
0.130	II. And now, second, I want to talk about MAN’S SIN—that people would hate the Savior for no reason.
0.131	Oh, dear friends, I will not tell you about people’s adulteries, sexual sins, murders, poisonings and sodomy.
0.132	I will not tell you about people’s wars, bloodshed, cruelty and rebellions. If I want to tell you about man’s sin, I must tell you that man is a God-killer. He put his God to death and killed his Savior. When I have told you that, I have given you the heart of all sin, the worst crime of all, the very top point of the terrifying pyramid of human guilt.
0.133	People went beyond anything they had ever done when they put their Savior to death. Sin was even worse than Herod when it killed the Lord of the universe, the one who loved the human race and came to earth to die.
0.134	Sin never looks so extremely sinful as when we see it aimed at Christ himself, whom it hated for no reason.
0.135	In every other case where people have hated goodness, there has always been something that made it a little less bad.
0.136	In this world we never see goodness that is completely pure. However good a man is, there is always something we can find to criticize. However excellent a person is, there is always some fault that can lessen our admiration or our love.
0.137	But there was nothing like that in the Savior.
0.138	There was nothing that could spoil the picture. Holiness stood out perfectly, just as it really is. There was holiness—only holiness.
0.139	Suppose a man hated Whitefield, one of the holiest men who ever lived. He would tell you he did not hate his goodness. He would say he hated his loud, wild preaching and the unusual stories he told. Or he would pick out something Whitefield had said and hold it up to make fun of it.
0.140	But in Christ’s case people could not do that. Even though they looked for false witnesses, their witnesses did not agree with each other.
0.141	There was nothing in him but holiness. Anyone with half an eye can see that what people hated was simply that Christ was perfect. They could not have hated him for anything else.
0.142	So you see how horrible and disgusting the evil of the human heart is: people hate goodness simply because it is good.
0.143	It is not true that we Christians are hated because of our weaknesses. People use our weaknesses as a hook to hang their laughter on. But if we were not Christians, they would not hate our weaknesses.
0.144	They make fun of the ways we don’t live up to what we say. But I don’t believe that is what they really care about. We could be as inconsistent as the rest of the world, if only we did not claim to be religious, or if they did not think we had any religion.
0.145	But the Savior had no inconsistencies and no weaknesses. So people lost all their excuses for hating him. And it became clear that people naturally hate goodness, because they are so evil that they can’t help hating it.
0.146	And now let me speak to every sinner here. Let me ask each one whether he ever had any reason to hate Christ.
0.147	But someone says, “I don’t hate him. If he came to my house, I would love him very much.”
0.148	But here is something very striking: Christ lives next door to you, in the person of poor Betty over there.
0.149	She goes to a certain chapel, and you say she is nothing but a poor Methodist who is always spouting religious talk.
0.150	Why don’t you like Betty?
0.151	She is part of Christ’s body, and he said, “Whatever you did to one of the least of these, you did to me.”
0.152	You say you don’t hate Christ.
0.153	Now, look across the chapel.
0.154	Don’t you know a man who is a member here, a very holy man, and somehow you can’t stand him because he once pointed out your faults?
0.155	Oh, sir, if you loved Christ, you would love the members of his body.
0.156	What! Are you telling me you love my head, but you don’t love my hands?
0.157	My dear friend, you can’t cut off my head and have me still be the same person.
0.158	If you love Christ, who is the head, you must love the members of his body.
0.159	But you say, “I do love his people.”
0.160	Very well. If you love your fellow believers, then you have passed from death to life.
0.161	But you say, “I’m not sure that I have been changed. Still, I don’t know of anything in my heart that is against Christ and his good news.”
0.162	You may not know about it. But the fact that you don’t know about it makes your situation even sadder.
0.163	Maybe if you knew it and cried over it, you would come to Christ. But since you don’t know it and don’t feel it, that proves you are against him.
0.164	Now come! Unless you love Christ, I have to assume you are against him. I know there are only two ways to think about him.
0.165	You must either hate him or love him.
0.166	Being neutral about Christ is simply impossible.
0.167	A man might as well say, “I don’t care one way or the other about honesty.”
0.168	Well, then he is dishonest, isn’t he?
0.169	You don’t care one way or the other about Christ?
0.170	Then you hate him.
0.171	And why do you hate him?
0.172	Many times the good news has tried to win you over. You have resisted many invitations. So come now: for which of Christ’s good deeds do you hate him?
0.173	Is there anyone here who persecutes Christ’s people?
0.174	Sinner! Why do you hate Christ?
0.175	Do you curse him?
0.176	Tell me what he has done to make you angry with him.
0.177	Point to one single thing he did wrong in the way he treated you. Has Christ ever hurt you?
0.178	“Oh,” someone says, “he has taken my wife and made her one of his children. She has been baptized and goes to chapel, and I can’t stand it.”
0.179	Oh, sinner, is that why you hate Christ?
0.180	Would you have hated Christ if he had pulled your wife out of a fire, if he had saved her from dying?
0.181	No, you would love him.
0.182	And he has saved your wife’s soul.
0.183	Oh, even if he never saves you, if you love your wife, you will have reason enough to love him when you think how good he has been to you.
0.184	I tell you, if you hate Christ, you don’t just hate him for no reason. You hate him when you have a clear reason to love him.
0.185	Come, poor sinner, what have you gained by hating Christ?
0.186	You have a guilty conscience that stings you.
0.187	Many sinners, by hating Christ, have ended up locked in jail, with a ragged coat, a sick body, and a nasty, filthy house with broken windows. They have a poor wife who has been beaten nearly to death, and children who run out of the way as soon as their father comes home.
0.188	What have you gained by hating Christ?
0.189	Oh, if you added up what you have gained, you would find that getting Christ would be a real gain, but hating him is a total loss for you.
0.190	Now, if you hate Christ and Christ’s religion, I tell you that you hate Christ for no reason. And let me give you one serious warning: if you keep hating Christ until you die, you will not hurt Christ by it, but you will hurt yourself terribly.
0.191	Oh, may God save you from being people who hate Christ!
0.192	There is nothing to gain from it, and everything to lose.
0.193	Sinner, what reason do you have to hate Christ?
0.194	Persecutor, what reason do you have to hate Christ?
0.195	You worldly, ungodly people, what reason do you have to hate Christ?
0.196	Why do you hate Christ’s good news?
0.197	His ministers—what harm have they done to you?
0.198	What harm can they do to you, when they want so badly to do you all the good in the world?
0.199	Why do you hate Christ?
0.200	Oh! It is only because you are so set on doing wrong—because snake poison is under your lips, and your throat is an open grave.
0.201	Otherwise, you would love Christ.
0.202	They hated him “for no reason.”
0.203	And now, Christians, I must preach straight at you for just a moment.
0.204	Surely you have great reason to love Christ now, because you once hated him for no reason.
0.205	Have you ever treated a friend badly without realizing it?
0.206	Most of us have had the bad luck of doing that at some time.
0.207	We suspected that a friend had done us wrong. We argued with him for weeks, and he hadn’t done it at all.
0.208	All he had done was warn us.
0.209	Oh! No tears are like the ones we cry when we have hurt a friend.
0.210	And shouldn’t we cry when we have hurt the Savior?
0.211	Didn’t he come to my door one cold, wet night, and I shut my door on him?
0.212	Oh, I have done something I can’t undo. I have ignored my Lord. I have insulted my friend. I have brought shame on the one I admire.
0.213	Shouldn’t I weep for him?
0.214	Oh, shouldn’t I spend my whole life for him? My sins, my own betrayal, spilled his blood.
0.215	I will build monuments—oh, monuments!—wherever I live and wherever I go.
0.216	I will pile up monuments of praise so that his name will spread. Wherever I go, I will tell what he did, with many tears, because I treated him badly for so long and misunderstood him so terribly.
0.217	We hated him for no reason, so let us love him.
H:0.16	III. TWO LESSONS FOR GOD’S PEOPLE.
0.218	First, if your Master was hated for no reason, don’t expect to have an easy time in this world.
0.219	If your Master went through all this scorn and all this pain, do you think you will always ride through this world in a fancy carriage?
0.220	If you do, you are badly mistaken.
0.221	Your Master was persecuted, so you must expect the same.
0.222	Some of you feel sorry for us when we are persecuted and looked down on.
0.223	Oh, save your pity! Keep it for the people the world speaks well of. Keep it for the people that the warning of trouble is aimed at.
0.224	“How terrible it will be for you when all people speak well of you.”
0.225	Save your pity for the world’s favorites. Save your pity for the great people of this world, whom everyone cheers.
0.226	We don’t ask for your pity. No, friends, we are glad in all these things. We “boast in our troubles too, knowing that the things that happen to us help the good news move forward.” And we think of it as nothing but joy when all sorts of hard tests come our way, because we are glad that the name of Christ becomes known and his kingdom grows.
0.227	The other lesson is this: if the world does hate you, make sure it hates you for no reason.
0.228	If the world is going to be against you, there is no point in making it be against you.
0.229	This world is bitter enough without me adding vinegar to it.
0.230	Some people seem to think the world will persecute them, so they get ready to fight, as if they were asking to be persecuted.
0.231	Now, I don’t see any good in doing that.
0.232	Don’t try to make other people dislike you.
0.233	Honestly, the opposition some people face is not because they do what is right. It is because of their own sin, or their own nasty temper.
0.234	Many a Christian lives in someone’s household—perhaps a Christian servant girl. She says she is persecuted for doing what is right.
0.235	But she has a bad attitude. Sometimes she speaks sharply, and then her mistress scolds her.
0.236	That is not being persecuted for doing what is right.
0.237	Then there is another person, maybe a businessman in the city. People don’t think very highly of him.
0.238	He says he is persecuted for doing what is right. But really it is because he didn’t keep a deal he made some time ago.
0.239	Another man says he is persecuted for doing what is right. But he goes around bossing everyone, and every now and then people turn around and tell him off.
0.240	Christians, make sure that if you are persecuted, it is for doing what is right. If you bring persecution on yourself, you have to carry it yourself.
0.241	Christ has nothing to do with the persecutions you bring on yourself by your own sins. They are discipline for you.
0.242	They hated Christ for no reason, so don’t be afraid of being hated.
0.243	They hated Christ for no reason, so don’t go looking to be hated. Don’t give the world any reason for it.
0.244	And now, may you who hate Christ come to love him! Oh, I wish he would bring himself to you right now!
0.245	Oh, I wish he would show himself to you!
0.246	And then surely you could not help loving him right away.
0.247	Whoever believes in the Lord Jesus will be sure to love him, and whoever loves him will be saved.
0.248	Oh, I pray that God would give you faith and give you love, for the sake of Christ Jesus! Amen.
