0.1	“Blessed are the peacemakers, because they will be called the children of God.” — Matthew 5:9.
0.2	This is the seventh of Jesus’ “blessed” sayings, the Beatitudes.
0.3	The number seven has always had something mysterious about it.
0.4	For the Hebrews, seven was the number of perfection. So it seems as if the Savior put the peacemaker in seventh place, as if the peacemaker came very close to being the perfect person in Christ Jesus.
0.5	If you want perfect happiness, as far as anyone can have it on earth, you must work hard to reach this seventh blessing. You must become a peacemaker.
0.6	Where this verse is placed also means something, if you look at the verses around it.
0.7	The verse just before it speaks of the blessing on “the pure in heart, because they will see God.”
0.8	It is good for us to understand this.
0.9	We are to be “pure first, and then peaceful.”
0.10	Being peaceful must never mean making a deal with sin or teaming up with what is evil.
0.11	We must set our faces as hard as stone against everything that goes against God and his holiness.
0.12	Once that is settled in our souls, we can move on to being peaceful toward people.
0.13	The verse that comes after my text also seems to have been put there on purpose.
0.14	No matter how peaceful we are in this world, people will still get us wrong and tell false stories about us. And that is no surprise. Even the Prince of Peace, just by being so peaceful, brought fire on the earth.
0.15	He loved people and did nothing wrong. Yet he was “looked down on and rejected by people, a man full of sorrows who knew all about grief.”
0.16	So that peaceful people would not be surprised when they meet enemies, the next verse adds, “Blessed are those who are treated cruelly for doing what is right, because the kingdom of heaven belongs to them.”
0.17	So peacemakers are not only called blessed. They are surrounded by blessings on every side.
0.18	Lord, give us grace to climb up to this seventh blessing!
0.19	Make our minds pure, so that we may be “pure first, and then peaceful.” And make our souls strong, so that when people persecute us for your sake, our peacefulness will not leave us shocked and hopeless.
0.20	Now let us try to get into the meaning of our text.
0.21	This is how we want to handle it this morning, as God helps us.
0.22	First, let us describe the peacemaker. Second, let us announce how blessed he is. Third, let us put him to work. And fourth, let the preacher become a peacemaker himself.
0.23	I. First, LET US DESCRIBE THE PEACEMAKER.
0.24	The peacemaker stands out because of his character. But on the outside, his place and situation in life are just like everyone else’s.
0.25	He has all the same relationships in life that other people have.
0.26	So the peacemaker is a citizen. He is a Christian, but he remembers that being a Christian does not mean giving up his citizenship. Instead, he must use it and make the most of it for Christ’s glory.
0.27	So, as a citizen, the peacemaker loves peace.
0.28	If he lives in this country, he knows he lives among people who are very touchy about their honor. They get angry quickly and easily. They love a fight so much that just hearing the word “war” gets their blood boiling. They feel like charging in at once with all their strength.
0.29	The peacemaker remembers the war with Russia. He remembers what fools we were to get involved there. It brought us huge losses in trade and money, and no benefit at all that anyone can see.
0.30	He knows that this nation has often slid into war for political reasons. And he knows that the weight and cost of war usually falls on the poor working man, on people who have to earn their living by hard, sweaty work.
0.31	Like other men, he feels his blood get hot. He was born an Englishman, so he often feels the blood of the old sea kings in his veins. But he holds it back and says to himself,
0.32	“I must not fight. The servant of God must be gentle to everyone, able to teach, and patient.”
0.33	So he pushes against the current. When he hears the noise of war everywhere, and sees many people eager for it, he does his best to cool things down. He says, “Be patient. Leave it alone. Even if this thing is bad, war is worse than any other evil.
0.34	There has never yet been a bad peace, and never a good war,” he says. “Whatever we may lose by being too calm, we will certainly lose a hundred times more by being too fierce.”
0.35	And in the present case, he thinks how terrible it would be for two Christian nations to go to war. These two nations come from the same blood. These two countries are really closer to each other than any other two countries on earth. They compete with each other in having free institutions. They work together to spread the gospel of Christ. And these two nations have more of God’s chosen people and more true followers of Christ than any other nations under heaven.
0.36	Yes, he thinks to himself, it would be terrible if the bones of our sons and daughters were used again to fertilize our fields, as has happened before.
0.37	He remembers that farmers from Yorkshire brought home soil from Waterloo to fertilize their own fields. That soil held the blood and bones of their own sons and daughters. He does not think it right that the prairies of America should be made rich with the blood and bones of his children. On the other hand, he thinks he would never hit another man. He would rather be hit himself. To him, blood would be an awful sight.
0.38	So he says, “What I would not do myself, I would not want others to do for me. If I would not be a killer, I would not want others to kill for me either.”
0.39	In his mind, he walks across a battlefield. He hears the screams of the dying and the groans of the wounded. He knows that even the winners of battles have said that all the excitement of victory could not take away the horror of the terrible scene after the fight. And so he says, “No! Peace, peace!”
0.40	He may have some influence in the country. He may be a member of Parliament, or write for a newspaper, or speak at public meetings. If so, he says, “Let us think carefully before we rush into this fight.
0.41	We must protect our country’s honor. We must keep our right to take in people who run away from those who oppress them. We must insist that England will always be a safe home for every rebel who flees from his king. It must be a place from which the oppressed will never be dragged away by force. But still,” he says, “can’t all this happen without any blood being shed?”
0.42	He asks the government’s lawyers to look into it carefully. Perhaps they can find that a mistake was made, one that can be forgiven and let go without shedding blood and without pulling the sword out of its sheath.
0.43	He says that war is a monster. Even at its best, it is a devil. Of all the terrible punishments, it is the worst. He sees soldiers as the red sticks of a bloody rod of punishment. He begs God not to strike a guilty nation in this way, but to put the sword away for a while. He asks this so that we are not thrown into trouble, crushed with sorrow, and exposed to cruelty that could send thousands to the grave and many more into poverty.
0.44	That is how the peacemaker acts. And while he does this, he feels that his conscience approves of him. He is blessed, and one day people will admit that he was one of the children of God.
0.45	But the peacemaker is not only a citizen. He is also a person. He may sometimes stay out of national politics. But as a person, he believes that in his own personal life, his “politics” must always be peace.
0.46	In his own life, if someone insults his honor, he does not fight to defend it. He believes it would hurt his honor more to be angry with another person than to put up with an insult.
0.47	He hears others say, “Even a worm will turn on you if you step on it.” But he says, “I am not a worm. I am a Christian. So I do not turn on anyone, except to bless the hand that hits me and to pray for those who treat me cruelly.”
0.48	He has a temper, because a peacemaker can get angry. And pity the man who can’t! Such a man is like Jacob limping because of his injured hip. Anger is one of the soul’s holy feet when it walks in the right direction. But even though he can get angry, he learns to “be angry without sinning,” and he “does not let the sun go down while he is still angry.”
0.49	At home, the peacemaker tries to stay calm with his servants and his family. He puts up with many things rather than say one unkind word. If he has to correct someone, he always does it gently. He says, “Why are you doing this? Why are you doing this?” He speaks not with the harshness of a judge, but with the tenderness of a father.
0.50	Perhaps the peacemaker can learn a lesson from a story I found last week while reading the life of Mr. John Wesley.
0.51	Wesley was sailing to America with Mr. Oglethorpe, who was going to be the governor of Savannah. One day Wesley heard a loud noise in the governor’s cabin.
0.52	So Mr. Wesley went in, and the governor said, “I suppose you want to know what all this noise is about, sir. I have a good reason for it.
0.53	You know, sir,” he said, “that the only wine I drink is wine from Cyprus, and I need it. I brought it on board, and this rascal, my servant Grimaldi, has drunk all of it! I will have him beaten on the deck. And when the first warship comes by, I will have him forced into the navy to serve the King. He will have a hard time of it, because I will let him know that I never forgive.”
0.54	“Your Honor,” said Mr. Wesley, “then I hope you never sin.”
0.55	That correction was so well said, so sharp, and so needed, that the governor answered right away, “Oh, sir, I do sin. And I have sinned in what I just said. For your sake, he will be forgiven. I hope he will not do it again.”
0.56	So the peacemaker always thinks it is best not to be too hard a master to his servants. After all, he is a sinner himself, and he must answer to his own Master. If he provokes his servants, he may also be provoking his God.
0.57	The peacemaker also goes out among people. When he is with others, he sometimes meets with nasty remarks and even insults. But he learns to put up with them, because he remembers that Christ put up with so much hostility from sinners.
0.58	Cotton Mather, a holy man and a great Puritan preacher in America, received a number of letters from people who did not sign their names. The letters insulted him badly. He read them and kept them. Then he wrapped a piece of paper around them, and before he put them on a shelf, he wrote on the paper: “Slander — Father, forgive them!”
0.59	That is what the peacemaker does.
0.60	About all these things he says, “This is slander — Father, forgive them!” He does not rush to defend himself. He knows that the One he serves will make sure his good name is protected, as long as he himself is careful about how he lives among people.
0.61	He goes into business. Sometimes things happen that make the peacemaker very tempted to take someone to court. But he never does, unless he is absolutely forced to. He knows that going to court is like playing with sharp knives. Even people who know how to use them still cut their own fingers.
0.62	The peacemaker remembers that the law makes the most money for the people who run it. He also knows this: people will give sixpence to the church for the good of their souls, and a guinea to their doctor for the good of their bodies. But they will spend a hundred pounds, or five hundred, on extra fees for their lawyers in the Court of Chancery.
0.63	So he says, “No. It is better for me to be wronged by my opponent, and let him gain a little, than for both of us to lose everything.”
0.64	So he lets some of these things go. And he finds that, overall, he loses nothing by sometimes giving up his rights.
0.65	There are times when he has to defend himself. But even then, he is ready to meet the other side in every way he can. He is willing to give in at any time.
0.66	He has learned the old saying that “an ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure.” So he takes care to make peace with his opponent quickly, while they are still on the way. He leaves a quarrel alone before it starts. Or if it has already started, he tries to end it as quickly as he can, knowing that God is watching.
0.67	The peacemaker is also a neighbor. He never tries to get involved in his neighbors’ quarrels, especially a quarrel between a neighbor and his wife. He knows very well that if those two disagree, they will quickly agree to turn against him if he gets in the middle. But if he is called in when two neighbors are quarreling, he never stirs up their anger. Instead he says to them, “You are not doing right, my brothers. Why are you fighting with each other?” He does not take the wrong side. He always tries to be fair. But he always mixes his fairness with mercy. And he says to the one who was wronged, “Can’t you be noble enough to forgive?”
0.68	Sometimes, when they are very angry, he steps between the two and takes the blows from both sides. He knows that this is what Jesus did. Jesus took the blows from his Father and from us too. By suffering in our place, he made peace between God and people.
0.69	That is how the peacemaker acts whenever he is asked to help. He does so especially if his position lets him do it with authority.
0.70	If he is a judge, he tries not to let a case go to trial if it can be settled some other way.
0.71	If he is a minister and his people disagree, he does not dig into the details. He knows very well that there is a lot of silly gossip. Instead he says “Peace” to the waves and “Hush” to the winds. And he tells people to live that way.
0.72	He thinks that they have so little time to live together that they really should live in harmony.
0.73	So he says, “How good and pleasant it is when brothers live together in unity!”
0.74	But once again, the peacemaker’s highest title is this: he is a Christian.
0.75	Because he is a Christian, he joins a Christian church. And there, as a peacemaker, he is like an angel of God.
0.76	Even in churches there are people who are weighed down by weaknesses. These weaknesses sometimes cause Christian men and women to disagree.
0.77	So the peacemaker says, “This is not right, my brother. Let us be at peace.” He remembers what Paul says: “I beg Euodias, and I beg Syntyche, to agree with each other in the Lord.” He thinks that if Paul begged these two to agree like this, unity must be a wonderful thing. So he works hard for it.
0.78	Sometimes the peacemaker sees that quarrels may break out between his own church group and others. Then he turns to the story of Abram. He reads how Abram’s herdsmen fought with Lot’s herdsmen. And he notices that the same verse says, “And the Canaanites and the Perizzites were living in the land.”
0.79	So he thinks it was shameful that followers of the true God would quarrel while the Perizzites were watching.
0.80	He says to Christians, “Don’t do this! We are giving the devil something to laugh at. We dishonor God. We harm our own cause. We ruin people’s souls.” And he says, “Put your swords back in their sheaths. Be at peace, and do not fight with one another.”
0.81	When people who are not peacemakers join a church, they will fight over the smallest pet idea and argue about the tiniest point. We have seen churches torn apart and Christian groups split over things so foolish that a wise man could not even see what the fuss was about. They were so silly that any sensible person would have ignored them.
0.82	The peacemaker says, “Go after peace with all people.”
0.83	Most of all, he prays that the Spirit of God, who is the Spirit of peace, will rest on the church at all times. He prays that the Spirit will bind believers together as one. Then, since they are one in Christ, the world will know that the Father has sent his Son into the world. After all, Christ’s coming was announced by the angels’ song: “Glory to God in the highest! Peace on earth, and good will to all people!”
0.84	Now, I hope that in describing the peacemaker I have described some of you. But I am afraid most of us would have to say, “Well, I fall short in many ways.”
0.85	But I would like to add this much.
0.86	If there are two Christian men here who are at odds with each other, I want to be a peacemaker. And I urge them to be peacemakers too.
0.87	Two men from Sparta had quarreled, and the Spartan king, Aris, told them both to meet him in a temple.
0.88	When they were both there, he listened to their quarrel. Then he said to the priest, “Lock the doors of the temple. These two will never leave until they have made up.” And there in the temple he said, “It is not right to quarrel.”
0.89	So they settled their quarrel right away and went home.
0.90	If this was done in a temple of idols, how much more should it be done in the house of God! And if the pagan Spartans did this, how much more should the Christian, who believes in Christ, do it!
0.91	This very day, put away all bitterness and all spite. Say to each other, “If you have offended me in any way, it is forgiven. And if I have offended you in any way, I admit I was wrong. Let’s heal the break between us. As children of God, let us be united with each other.”
0.92	Blessed are those who can do this, for “blessed are the peacemakers!”
0.93	II. Now that I have described the peacemaker, I will go on to DECLARE HOW BLESSED HE IS.
0.94	“Blessed are the peacemakers, because they will be called the children of God.”
0.95	The text gives him three kinds of praise.
0.96	First, he is blessed. That means God blesses him. And I know that anyone God blesses is truly blessed, and anyone God curses is truly cursed.
0.97	God blesses him from the highest heavens. God blesses him the way only God can. God blesses him with the rich blessings that are stored up in Christ.
0.98	And while God blesses him, that blessing also spreads all through his own soul.
0.99	His conscience tells him that, with God watching and with the help of the Holy Spirit, he has tried to honor Christ among people.
0.100	He is most blessed of all when he has been attacked with the most curses. Because then this promise comes to comfort him: “That is how they persecuted the prophets who lived before you.”
0.101	He is commanded to rejoice at all times. But he finds a special command to be very glad when he is treated badly.
0.102	So he takes it well if he is made to suffer for doing good. He is happy to carry part of the Savior’s cross this way.
0.103	He goes to bed, and no dreams of hatred trouble his sleep. He gets up and goes to work, and he is not afraid to face anyone. He can say, “There is nothing in my heart but friendship toward everyone.” Or if he is attacked with lies, and his enemies have made up a story against him, he can still say —
0.104	“The one who made the arrow and the one who threw it at me / Each has a place in my heart, like a brother.”
0.105	Because he loves everyone, he has peace in his own soul. He is blessed, like someone who inherits the blessing of the Most High God.
0.106	And quite often it even happens that wicked people speak well of him. They would like to hold back a kind word about him, but they cannot.
0.107	He defeats evil by doing good. That is like heaping burning coals on their heads. He melts their cold hatred, until even they say, “He is a good man.”
0.108	And when he dies, the people he helped make peace with each other stand by his grave and say, “It would be good if the world could see many more people like him. There would not be half the fighting, or half the sin, in the world if there were many like him.”
0.109	Second, notice that the text does not only say he is blessed. It adds that he is one of the children of God.
0.110	He is God’s child by adoption and by grace. But making peace is a sweet sign that the peaceful Spirit is at work inside him.
0.111	Also, as a child of God, he looks like his Father in heaven.
0.112	God is peaceful, patient, and tender. He is full of loving kindness, pity, and compassion.
0.113	This peacemaker is the same.
0.114	Because he is like God, he carries his Father’s likeness.
0.115	In this way he shows people that he is one of God’s children.
0.116	As one of God’s children, the peacemaker can come close to his Father.
0.117	He comes to him boldly and says, “Our Father who is in heaven.” But he would not dare to say that unless he could also pray with a clear conscience, “Forgive us what we owe, just as we forgive those who owe us.”
0.118	He feels connected like a brother to all people. So he feels that he can rejoice that God is his Father.
0.119	He comes with confidence and great joy to his Father in heaven. He is one of the children of the Most High, who is good even to ungrateful and evil people.
0.120	And there is still a third word of praise in the text.
0.121	“They will be called the children of God.”
0.122	They not only are God’s children, but they will be called God’s children.
0.123	That means even their enemies will call them that. Even the world will say, “Ah! That man is a child of God.”
0.124	Dear friends, perhaps nothing impresses ungodly people as much as a Christian who stays peaceful when he is insulted.
0.125	There was a soldier in India, a big man. Before he joined the army he had been a boxer, and later he did many brave things in battle.
0.126	When he became a Christian through a missionary’s preaching, all the soldiers he ate with made fun of him.
0.127	They thought it was impossible for a man like him to become a peaceful Christian.
0.128	So one day at dinner, one of them, just to be cruel, threw a whole bowl of boiling-hot soup in his face and down his chest.
0.129	The poor man tore his clothes open to wipe off the burning liquid. But even though he was badly shaken, he kept control of himself. He said, “I am a Christian. I must expect this,” and he smiled at them.
0.130	The man who did it said, “If I had known you would take it like that, I would never have done it. I am very sorry I did.”
0.131	His patience put their cruelty to shame, and they all said he was a real Christian.
0.132	In this way he was called a child of God.
0.133	What they saw in him was proof, and it struck them all the more because they knew they could never have done the same.
0.134	One day Mr. Kilpin of Exeter was walking down the street. A wicked man pushed him off the sidewalk into the gutter. As he fell, the man said, “Lie there, John Bunyan! That’s good enough for you.”
0.135	Mr. Kilpin got up and went on his way. Later, the man wanted to know how he had taken the insult. He was surprised that all Mr. Kilpin said was that the man had honored him more than he had shamed him. Mr. Kilpin thought that being called John Bunyan was worth being rolled in the gutter a thousand times.
0.136	Then the man who had done it said that Mr. Kilpin was a good man.
0.137	So those who are peacemakers are “called the children of God.”
0.138	They show it to the world so clearly that even the blind must see it and even the deaf must hear it: God is truly in them.
0.139	Oh, if only we had enough grace to win this wonderful praise!
0.140	My friend who is listening, God may have brought you far enough to hunger and thirst for what is right. If so, I beg you, never stop being hungry until he has brought you all the way to being a peacemaker, so that you may be called a child of God.
0.141	III. But now, third, I will try to PUT THE PEACEMAKER TO WORK.
0.142	I am sure you have a lot of work to do in your own homes and among the people you know.
0.143	Go and do it.
0.144	You remember that verse in Job: “Who can eat bland food without salt? Is there any taste in the white of an egg?” Job wants us to understand that tasteless things need something added to them, or they will not be pleasant to eat.
0.145	Now, to people, our religion tastes bland. We must add salt to it. And that salt must be our calm and peacemaking spirit.
0.146	Then people who would have avoided our religion by itself will see the salt added and say, “This is good.” They will find some flavor in this “white of an egg.”
0.147	If you want people to think well of your faith, start in your own homes. Do a clear and clean job of it. Get rid of the old yeast, so that you can offer God a sacrifice that is godly and heavenly.
0.148	If there are any quarrels or divisions among you, I beg you: forgive each other, just as God forgave you for Christ’s sake.
0.149	I ask you by the bloody sweat of the one who prayed for you, and by the agony of the one who died for you. As he was dying he said, “Father, forgive them, because they do not understand what they are doing.” So forgive your enemies. “Pray for those who treat you badly, and bless those who curse you.”
0.150	Let people always say about you as a Christian, “That man is gentle and humble in heart. He would rather be hurt himself than hurt someone else.”
0.151	But the main work I want to give you is this. Jesus Christ was the greatest peacemaker of all.
0.152	“He is our peace.”
0.153	He came to make peace between Jews and Gentiles, “for he has made the two into one, and has broken down the wall that divided us.”
0.154	He came to make peace between all the nations that fight each other. For now there is “no more Greek or barbarian, Scythian, slave or free, but Christ is everything, in everyone.”
0.155	He came to make peace between his Father’s justice and our sinful souls. And he has made peace for us through the blood of his cross.
0.156	Now, you who are children of peace, try to be tools in his hands to make peace between God and people.
0.157	Send up earnest prayers to heaven for your children’s souls.
0.158	Never stop praying for the souls of all your friends and relatives.
0.159	Pray that the people around you who are perishing will be saved.
0.160	That is how you will be peacemakers.
0.161	And when you have prayed, use every means you have.
0.162	Preach, if God has given you the ability. Preach with the Holy Spirit sent down from heaven. Preach the word of life that brings people back to God.
0.163	If you cannot preach, teach.
0.164	Teach the Word. “Be eager to do it whether the time seems right or not.”
0.165	“Sow seed beside every stream.” For the gospel “speaks better things than the blood of Abel.” It calls out “Peace!” to all people.
0.166	Write to your friends about Christ. And if you cannot say much, say a little for him.
0.167	But oh, make it the goal of your life to win others for Christ!
0.168	Never be content to go to heaven alone.
0.169	Ask the Lord to make you a spiritual father to many children. Ask God to bless you so that you help bring in a big part of the Redeemer’s harvest.
0.170	I thank God that so many of you care deeply about people’s souls.
0.171	It makes my heart glad to hear about people coming to faith and to welcome the new believers. But I am happiest when many of you, who came to faith through my ministry with God’s help, are used to bring others to faith.
0.172	There are brothers and sisters here who keep bringing me people. They were the first to bring these people to this church. They watched over them and prayed for them. And at last they brought them to the minister, so that he could hear them tell about their faith.
0.173	Such peacemakers are blessed!
0.174	You have “saved a soul from death and hidden a great many sins.”
0.175	“Those who turn many people to what is right will shine like the stars for ever and ever.”
0.176	In fact, in heaven itself they “will be called the children of God.”
0.177	In that book where the names of all the Lord’s people are written, their family record will show this: through God the Holy Spirit, they brought souls into the bond of peace through Jesus Christ.
H:0.20	IV. Last of all, the minister must now PRACTICE HIS OWN TEXT AND TRY, THROUGH GOD THE HOLY SPIRIT, TO BE A PEACEMAKER THIS MORNING.
0.178	This morning I am speaking to many, many people who know nothing about peace. For “the wicked have no peace,” says my God.
0.179	“The wicked are like the stormy sea, which can never be still. Its waves throw up mud and dirt.”
0.180	I am not speaking to you because I want to give your souls a false peace.
0.181	How terrible it will be for the prophets who say, “Peace, peace,” when there is no peace!
0.182	Instead, so that we do a thorough job of this, let me first show you the truth: your soul has no peace and is at war.
0.183	O soul! This morning you are at war with your conscience.
0.184	You have tried to quiet it, but it keeps stinging you.
0.185	You have locked up your conscience, the Recorder of the town of Mansoul, in a dark place, and you have built a wall in front of his door. But still, when his fits come on him, your conscience will thunder at you and say, “This is not right! This is the path that leads to hell! This is the road to destruction!”
0.186	Oh! For some of you, conscience is like a ghost that haunts you day and night.
0.187	You know what is good, but you choose what is evil. When you try to pick the rose of sin, you prick your fingers on the thorns of conscience.
0.188	For you, the road down is not an easy one. It is blocked with hedges and ditches, and there are many bars and gates and chains along the way. But you climb over them all, determined to destroy your own souls.
0.189	Oh! There is war between you and your conscience.
0.190	Conscience says, “Turn around.” But you say, “I won’t.”
0.191	Conscience says, “Close your shop on Sunday.” Conscience says, “Change the way you do business. It is cheating.” Conscience says, “Don’t lie to each other, because the Judge is standing at the door.” Conscience says, “Get rid of that drinking cup. It turns a man into something worse than an animal.” Conscience says, “Tear yourself away from that immoral relationship. Be done with that evil. Lock your door against lust.” But you say, “I will drink the sweet stuff even if it damns me. I will keep going back to my drinking and my old hangouts, even if I die in my sins.”
0.192	There is war between you and your conscience.
0.193	And yet your conscience is God’s representative in your soul.
0.194	Let your conscience speak for a minute or two this morning.
0.195	Don’t be afraid of him. He is a good friend to you. He may speak roughly, but the day will come when you will realize that there is more music in the roaring of conscience than in all the sweet, tempting songs that lust uses to trick you into ruin.
0.196	Let your conscience speak.
0.197	But there is more. There is war between you and God’s law.
0.198	The Ten Commandments are against you this morning.
0.199	The first one steps forward and says, “Let him be cursed, because he denies me.
0.200	He has another god besides me. His god is his stomach. He bows down to his lust.”
0.201	All ten commandments are aimed at you today, like ten huge cannons. You have broken all of God’s laws, and every day you have ignored all his commands.
0.202	Soul! You will find it very hard to go to war with the law.
0.203	When the law came in peace, Mount Sinai was covered in smoke, and even Moses said, “I am shaking with fear.”
0.204	What will you do when the law comes in terror? What will you do when the archangel’s trumpet tears you out of your grave? When God’s eyes burn their way into your guilty soul? When the great books are opened, and all your sin and shame are made public?
0.205	Can you stand against an angry law on that day?
0.206	When the officers of the law come to hand you over to the torturers, and throw you away forever from peace and happiness, sinner, what will you do?
0.207	Can you live with fires that never go out?
0.208	Can you bear the burning that lasts forever?
0.209	O man! “Make peace with your enemy quickly, while you are still on the road with him. If you don’t, he may turn you over to the judge, and the judge may give you to the officer, and you will be put in prison.
0.210	I tell you the truth, you will never get out of there until you have paid every last penny.”
0.211	But sinner, do you know that this morning you are at war with God?
0.212	He made you and was your best friend, but you have forgotten him and ignored him.
0.213	He has fed you, and you have used your strength against him.
0.214	He has clothed you. The clothes on your back today are the uniform of his goodness. Yet instead of serving the one whose uniform you wear, you are the slave of his worst enemy.
0.215	The very breath in your nose is a loan from his kindness. And yet you may use that breath to curse him. Or at best you use it for dirty and careless talk that dishonors his laws.
0.216	The one who made you has become your enemy because of your sin. And today you still hate him and look down on his Word.
0.217	You say, “I don’t hate him.”
0.218	Then, soul, I command you: “Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ.”
0.219	“No,” you say, “I can’t. I won’t do that!”
0.220	Then you do hate him.
0.221	If you loved him, you would keep this great command of his.
0.222	“His command is not hard to keep.” It is sweet and easy.
0.223	You would believe in his Son if you loved the Father, for “everyone who loves the Father also loves the one who is born of him.”
0.224	Are you really at war with God like this? That is surely a terrible place to be!
0.225	Can you face the one who comes against you with ten thousand? Yes, can you stand against the Almighty? He makes heaven shake when he scolds, and he crushes the twisting serpent with a single word.
0.226	Do you hope to hide from him?
0.227	“Can anyone hide in secret places where I cannot see him? says the Lord.
0.228	Even if you dig down into Carmel, he will pull you out from there.
0.229	Even if you dive into the caves at the bottom of the sea, he will command the serpent there, and it will bite you.
0.230	If you make your bed in hell, he will find you.
0.231	If you climb up to heaven, he is there.”
0.232	All of creation is your prison, and he can find you whenever he wants.
0.233	Or do you think you can survive his anger?
0.234	Are your ribs made of iron? Are your bones made of bronze?
0.235	Even if they were, they would still melt like wax when the Lord God of armies comes. For he is mighty. Like a lion he will tear his prey to pieces, and like a fire he will burn up his enemy, “for our God is a fire that burns everything up.”
