0.1	The story of Moses is one of the most beautiful and exciting stories in the whole world.
0.2	It grabs hold of us and never stops being interesting, not even for a moment. It is told so vividly that once you hear it, you never forget it.
0.3	I have often imagined how worried everyone was when that child was born. He came into the world with a death sentence hanging over him. Pharaoh had ordered that all the baby boys must die.
0.4	But his mother refused to obey even the king's command. She made up her mind that her child would live. So right from the start, the battle of right against power was fought at a baby's cradle.
0.5	Moses' mother was a slave woman.
0.6	She had to work in the brickyards or in the fields. But God was on her side, and she won. A mother always wins when God is on her side.
0.7	Before she went to work, she had to find a place to hide her child. She put his little sister, Miriam, on guard. Meanwhile she kept out of sight of Pharaoh's soldiers, who were searching everywhere to kill the Jewish baby boys.
0.8	She kept him hidden for three months. She may have found a new hiding place every few days.
0.9	It is hard to think of anything harder than hiding a healthy, growing baby. Yet he stayed hidden for three whole months.
0.10	By now he had grown bigger and livelier, so a safer hiding place had to be found. I can picture this mother giving up her rest and sleep to build a little floating ark to save her child.
0.11	I believe the plan must have come from heaven.
0.12	I have often thought that God must have cared about that work as much as Moses' mother did. You can't make me believe that something so important, with such huge results, just happened by luck or chance.
0.13	Maybe God whispered the plan to her when she came to Him in prayer. She was grieving, because she was afraid Pharaoh's sword would kill her child.
0.14	And how carefully she had to choose the material to make the ark!
0.15	I think she checked every twig carefully so that nothing weak would end up in it. As she wove that ark, she wove into it her heart, her soul, her prayers and her tears.
0.16	Oh, mothers, if only you took that much care over the friends your children spend time with, the books they read and the places they go! Then there would not be so many girls ending up in the red-light district. And there would not be so many boys growing up to live as criminals.
0.17	And how thankfully she must have poured out her heart when the work was finally done! The ark was ready to carry its precious cargo. That cargo was more precious than if it had held the crown jewels of Egypt.
0.18	I can picture the last night that baby spent at home.
0.19	Some of you can probably remember the last night your baby was alive. You remember the last night the coffin stayed in your home. And you remember how the pallbearers and the hearse came the next day.
0.20	Others in the house may have slept soundly, but you could not sleep. And I imagine Moses' mother could not sleep either.
0.21	"There are toy whips and tops and pieces of string / And shoes that no little feet will wear; / There are bits of ribbon and broken wings / And curls of golden hair.
0.22	"There are pretty little jackets that no one wears, / There are toys and model ships; / There are books and pictures, faded and torn / And marked by the fingertips / Of little dimpled hands that have turned to dust— / Still we try to believe that the Lord is fair.
0.23	"Still, a bitter feeling fills our soul, / Even when we try to pray, / Because Death spared so many other flowers / And took ours away. / And sometimes we doubt that the Lord can know / How much our broken hearts loved them so.
0.24	"But then we think of our loved ones who have died, / Our children who will never grow old, / And how they are waiting and watching for us / In the city with streets of gold; / And how they are safe through all the years / From sickness and hunger and war. / With tears running down, we thank our great God / For the things in the cabinet drawer."
H:0.9	A Mother Keeps Watch
0.25	Others in the house might have slept. But she could not waste a single moment of the precious time she had left with her little one. All through the night she must have prayed. She asked God to shield and protect her baby, to bless the work she had done, and to bless the step she was about to take.
0.26	People often ask me, "I wonder what the angels do. How do they spend their time?"
0.27	I think I know what some of them were doing that night.
0.28	You can be sure they were not off at some card party.
0.29	They guarded that house so closely that not one of old Pharaoh's soldiers ever stepped through the door.
0.30	They made sure that none of those soldiers hurt that baby.
0.31	At dawn the mother must have kissed him goodbye. She put him in the ark and hid him among the tall reeds. Then, with an aching heart and eyes full of tears, she went back to the field and the brickyards. There she worked and waited to see what God would do.
0.32	She had prayed and done her very best. When you have done that, you can count on God to give you the help you need.
0.33	If only we believed that with God everything is possible, no matter how unlikely it seems! Then the Lord would answer our prayers in ways we never expected.
0.34	She knew God would help her somehow. But I don't think she ever dreamed that God would do it by sending Pharaoh's own daughter to take care of the child.
0.35	It was no harder for God to send the princess than to get the mother to build the ark.
0.36	What seemed impossible to her was easy for God.
0.37	Pharaoh's daughter came down to the river to bathe. The ark was found, just as God wanted. One of her servant girls was sent to bring it to her.
0.38	You often wonder what the angels are up to.
0.39	I think some of the angels rounded up the crocodiles on the far side of the Nile. That kept them from finding Moses and eating him.
0.40	You can be sure all of heaven was watching to make sure not one hair on that baby's head was hurt.
0.41	All the devils in hell put together could not have pulled a single hair out of its head.
0.42	The ark was brought to her. With a woman's curiosity, Pharaoh's daughter just had to look inside to see what was there. When they took off the cover, there lay a strong, healthy baby boy. He was kicking his heels and sucking his thumbs, as most of us probably did when we were boys, and as you probably did when you were a girl.
0.43	The baby looks up and cries. Those tears wiped out everything that was against it and gave it a chance to live.
0.44	I don't know for sure, but I think an angel stood there and pinched it to make it cry. It certainly cried at just the right time.
0.45	That's just how God plans things.
0.46	God always acts at just the right time.
0.47	Give God a chance. He may seem a little slow sometimes, but He will always show up in time.
0.48	That baby's tears were the jewels that paid for Israel's freedom from slavery in Egypt.
0.49	The princess had a woman's heart. And when a woman's heart meets a baby's tears, something happens that makes the devil lose his nerve.
0.50	Maybe the princess had lost a baby of her own. Seeing Moses may have torn that old wound open and made it bleed again.
0.51	But she had a woman's heart. It made her forget that she was Pharaoh's daughter, and she made up her mind to protect that baby.
0.52	Faithful Miriam (praise the Lord for Miriam!) could see the princess's feelings showing on her face.
0.53	Miriam had studied people's faces so much that she could read the princess's heart like an open book. So she said to her, "Shall I go and find one of the Hebrew women to nurse the baby for you?" And the princess said, "Go."
0.54	I can see her little feet and legs flying as she runs down the hot, dusty road. Her mother must have seen her coming a mile away. And she ran to meet her and have her own baby placed back in her arms.
0.55	And she was even paid in Egyptian gold to take care of her own baby!
0.56	Do you see how the Lord works?
0.57	"Now take this child and take care of it for me, and I will pay you your wages."
0.58	The joke was on Pharaoh's daughter. She was paying Moses' mother to do what she wanted to do more than anything else—take care of her own baby.
0.59	How quickly the mother was repaid for those long hours of worry, fear and grief! If the angels know what is happening down here, heaven must have been full of joy and laughter when they saw Moses and Miriam back at home, safe under the protection of Pharaoh's daughter.
0.60	I imagine she fell to her knees and poured out her heart to God, who had helped her in such a wonderful way.
0.61	She must have said, "Well, Lord, I knew You would help me.
0.62	I knew You would take care of my baby when I made the ark, put him in it and set it in the water. But I never dreamed You would put him back in my arms for me to look after. Now I don't have to slave away in the field making bricks. And I don't have to be tortured almost to death with fear that Pharaoh's soldiers will find my baby and kill him.
0.63	I never thought You would soften Pharaoh's hard heart and make him pay me to do what I would rather do than anything else in the world."
0.64	I expect to meet Moses' mother in heaven, and I'm going to ask her how much old Pharaoh had to pay her for that job.
0.65	I think that's one of the best jokes ever. That old sinner had to pay the mother to take care of her own baby!
0.66	But I tell you, if you give God a chance, He will fill your heart until it overflows.
0.67	All you have to do is give Him a chance.
H:0.17	A Mother's Courage
0.68	This mother had amazing courage.
0.69	Everything was against her, but she refused to give up.
0.70	She never lost heart.
0.71	She fought as bravely as any man ever fought with cannons booming and rifles roaring around him.
0.72	"The bravest battle that was ever fought— / Shall I tell you where and when? / You won't find it on the maps of the world— / It was fought by the mothers of men.
0.73	"No, it wasn't fought with cannons or bullets, / With swords or with a noble pen, / No, not with the powerful words or ideas / That come from the mouths of great men.
0.74	"But deep inside a woman's hidden heart— / The hearts of women who would not give in, / But bravely and silently did their part— / Look, that is the battlefield.
0.75	"No troops lining up, no songs around the campfire, / No flag to shine and wave; / But oh, these battles last so long— / From babyhood to the grave."
0.76	Mothers are always brave when their children's safety is at stake.
0.77	This happened out West.
0.78	A mother was working in her garden, and her little child was sitting under a tree in the yard, playing.
0.79	The mother heard the child scream and ran to it. A huge snake was wrapping itself around the baby. As the snake's head swung around, she jumped and grabbed it by the neck. She tore it off her baby and threw it hard against a tree.
0.80	Fathers often quit.
0.81	The man of the house often starts drinking, wastes his life away, takes poison and kills himself. But the mother will stand by the home and keep the little family together. She will do it even if the only manicure her fingernails ever get is scrubbing clothes on a washboard.
0.82	If men had half as much grit as women, the stories of many homes would be very different.
0.83	Just look at the work she does!
0.84	It is the greatest work in the world. Its importance reaches so far that it rises high above everything else in the universe. Her job is to mold hearts and lives and to shape character.
0.85	If you want to find greatness, don't go to a king's throne. Go to a baby's cradle. The closer you get to the cradle, the closer you get to greatness.
0.86	Now, when Jesus wanted to teach His disciples a lesson they would never forget, did He call in a college professor?
0.87	Not a chance. He brought in a little child and said, "Unless you become like one of these, you will never enter the kingdom of God."
0.88	This work is so important that God will trust nobody but a mother with it.
0.89	Sending a boy or girl out into life to live for Christ is a greater job than launching a battleship.
0.90	Moses was a special instrument chosen by the Lord. God wanted him to get the right start in life, so He gave him a good mother.
0.91	There wasn't a college professor in all of Egypt that God would trust with that baby! So He put the child back in its mother's arms.
0.92	He knew that the best person on earth to trust with that baby was its own mother.
0.93	When God sends us great men, He wants them to have the right start.
0.94	So He makes sure they have a good mother.
0.95	Just about any old stick will do for a dad.
0.96	But God is very choosy about mothers.
H:0.27	We Need Good Mothers
0.97	So the great need of this country, or any other country, is good mothers. And I believe America has more good mothers than any other nation on earth.
0.98	If Washington's mother had been like a Happy Hooligan's mother, Washington would have grown up to be a Happy Hooligan.
0.99	Someone once said, "God couldn't be everywhere, so He gave us mothers."
0.100	That may sound like poetry, but it is true that "the hand that rocks the cradle rules the world." If every cradle were rocked by a good mother, the world would be full of good men, as sure as you are breathing.
0.101	If every boy and girl today had a good mother, the bars and the brothels would be out of business by tomorrow.
0.102	One time a young man joined a church, and the preacher asked him, "What did I say that made you decide to become a Christian?"
0.103	The young man answered, "It wasn't anything I heard you say. It was the way my mother lived."
0.104	I tell you, one ounce of example weighs more than forty million tons of theory and guesswork.
0.105	If mothers lived the way they should, we preachers would have very little to do.
0.106	Keep the devil out of the boys and girls, and he will have to leave the world.
0.107	The old sinners will die off if we keep the young ones pure.
0.108	The biggest place in the world belongs to the people who work closely with young people.
0.109	Being a king, an emperor or a president is a very small thing compared to being a mother or a teacher of children, whether in a public school or a Sunday school. Their places are so great that every angel in heaven would gladly throw in a whole basket of diamonds for the chance to come down here and take their place.
0.110	Compared with training a boy or girl, commanding an army is not much more than sweeping a street or hammering on an anvil.
0.111	Moses' mother did more for the world than all the kings Egypt ever had.
0.112	Teaching a child to love the truth and hate lies, to love purity and hate sin, is a greater thing than inventing a flying machine that could take you to the moon before breakfast.
0.113	Without even knowing it, you start influences moving that will either curse or bless this old universe. They can bring new worlds out of chaos and change them for God.
H:0.33	God's Own Hall of Fame
0.114	A man once sent a friend of mine some crystals and said, "Just one of these crystals, no bigger than the point of a pin, will turn sixteen huge barrels of water a clear green color."
0.115	Think of it! There is enough power in one tiny speck to color sixteen huge barrels of water.
0.116	A single word or action has the power to ruin a boy, and through him to bring a curse on a whole community.
0.117	There is also enough power in a word to color that child's whole life, so that the child becomes a power that lifts the world to Jesus Christ.
0.118	Mothers start influences moving that will reach either heaven or hell.
0.119	Talk about greatness!
0.120	Oh, just wait until you reach the mountains of eternity! Then read the mothers' names in God's hall of fame, and you will see what they have been in this world.
0.121	Wait until you see God's hall of fame. In it you will see women bent over the washtub.
0.122	I want to tell you women something. Wasting your time hugging and kissing a poodle, petting a "Spitz" dog, drinking fancy brandy drinks and cocktails at parties, and playing cards is a very small thing compared to shaping the life of a child.
0.123	So tell me, where did Moses get his faith?
0.124	From his mother. Where did Moses get the courage to say, "I refuse to be called the son of Pharaoh's daughter"?
0.125	It came from his mother.
0.126	Where did Moses get the nerve to say "Excuse me, please" to the pleasures of Egypt?
0.127	He got that from his mother too.
0.128	You can be sure he didn't pick it up from his dad.
0.129	Plenty of boys would have turned out better if their old dad had died before they were born.
0.130	You tell your son to stay away from bad company.
0.131	But sometimes when he walks down the street with his father, he is with the worst company in town.
0.132	His dad smokes, drinks and chews tobacco.
0.133	Moses got all this from his mother.
0.134	He was educated in all the wisdom of Egypt, but it didn't make him big-headed.
0.135	When God wants to fling a world out into space, He doesn't worry about it.
0.136	The first mile that world travels sets its path forever.
0.137	But when God sends a child out into the world, He cares very much that it gets a good start.
0.138	The Catholics are right when they say, "Let us have the children until they are ten, and after that we don't care who has them."
0.139	The Catholics aren't losing any sleep worrying about men and women leaving their church.
0.140	It is the only church that has ever shown us the one sensible way to reach the masses of people. That way is to get hold of the children.
0.141	That's the only way on God's earth you will ever solve the problem of reaching the masses.
0.142	Get the boys and girls started right, and the devil will hang a black mourning ribbon on his door and let his fires die down. Hell will be up for rent before the Fourth of July!
0.143	A friend of mine had to take her little girl to the hospital for an operation.
0.144	They thought she would be scared, but she said, "I don't mind, as long as Mama is there to hold my hand."
0.145	They got her ready for the operation and led her into the room. They put her on the table, placed the cone over her face and soaked it with ether. Then she said, "Now, Mama, take my hand and hold it, and I won't be afraid."
0.146	So the mother stood there and held her hand.
0.147	The operation was done. When she woke up, they asked her, "Bessie, weren't you afraid when they put you on the table?"
0.148	She said, "No, Mama stood right there and held my hand.
0.149	I wasn't scared."
0.150	A mother's hand has great power.
0.151	There is more power in a woman's hand than in a king's royal staff.
0.152	There is great power in a mother's kiss, too. A mother's kiss gives inspiration, courage, hope and ambition.
0.153	One kiss made Benjamin West a painter, and he remembered it all his life.
0.154	One kiss can chase away a child's fear in the dark and make the little one brave.
0.155	It gives strength where there is weakness.
0.156	One day I was in a town and saw a mother out with her boy. He had big steel braces on both legs, all the way up to his hips. When I got close enough, I could tell from their talk that this was not the first time his mother had taken him out for a walk.
0.157	She was taking him out to exercise so he could learn to use his legs.
0.158	He was struggling, but she smiled and said, "You're doing great today—better than yesterday."
0.159	Then she bent down and kissed him. That encouraging kiss made him try even harder. She said, "You're doing wonderfully, son."
0.160	And he said, "Mama, I'm going to run. Watch me!"
0.161	He started off, but one of his toes caught on the steel brace of his other leg, and he stumbled. She caught him, kissed him and said, "That was fine, son. You did so well!"
0.162	He tried it because his mother had encouraged him with a kiss.
0.163	He wasn't trying to show off.
0.164	Nothing helps and inspires a person's life like a mother's kiss.
0.165	"If we knew those little baby fingers pressed against the window / Would be cold and still tomorrow, never to bother us again, / Would our darling's bright eyes ever see a frown on our face?
0.166	"Let's gather up the sunbeams lying all along our path, / Let's keep the wheat and roses and throw out the thorns and husks! / We will find our sweetest comfort in the blessings of today, / As with patient hands we clear the prickly weeds from our way."
H:0.45	A Mother's Singing
0.167	A mother's song has power too.
0.168	It's the best music the world has ever heard.
0.169	The best music in the world is like the best biscuits—it's the kind Mother makes.
0.170	No brass band or pipe organ comes anywhere close to Mother's singing.
0.171	Calvé, Melba, Nordica, Eames, Schumann-Heink—they're nothing special compared to Mother.
0.172	They can't really sing at all.
0.173	They don't even know the basics of the kind of music Mother sings.
0.174	Her kind of music wraps itself around your heart.
0.175	Heaven's music would disappoint me if there were no mothers there to sing.
0.176	The song of an angel or any other heavenly being would not mean much to me.
0.177	What would an angel's song mean to you if there were no mother's song?
0.178	A mother's song is sweeter than any song ever sung by a singer or written by a poet.
0.179	Talk about beautiful poems! You should hear a mother sing when her baby is at her breast and her heart is full of feeling.
0.180	Her voice may not impress an expert, but it will please anyone who has a heart.
0.181	The songs that have moved the world are not the ones written by the great composers.
0.182	In my opinion, the best music is not the perfect performance of these expensive opera singers.
0.183	No art in the world can turn into a melody the happiness that our connections and memories bring.
0.184	I think when we get to heaven we will find that some of the best songs we sing there are the ones we learned at our mother's knee.
H:0.48	A Mother's Love
0.185	A mother's love has power.
0.186	A mother's love must be a lot like God's love.
0.187	I have often wondered how God could ever have told the world He loved it without a mother's help.
0.188	If the devils in hell ever turned pale with fear, it was on the day a mother's love first blazed up in a woman's heart.
0.189	In my opinion, if the devil ever got scared, it was on that day.
0.190	You know that a mother has to love her baby even before it is born.
0.191	Like God, she has to go into the dark valley of death to bring it into the world. She will love her child and suffer for it. The child can grow up and become wicked, and still she will love it.
0.192	Nothing will make her blame her child. And I think, women, that one of the most awful things about hell will be that there is no mother's love there.
0.193	In hell there is nothing but black, bottomless, endless, eternal hate—no mother's love.
0.194	"And even if he crawls through the worst caves of sin, / And crouches, maybe, with bleary, bloodshot eyes, / Under the hangman's rope—his mother's lips / Will kiss him in his last bed of shame, / And love him even for what she hoped he would be."
0.195	I thank God for what a mother's love has done for the world.
0.196	Oh, there is power in what God trusts a mother with.
0.197	Just as surely as the princess put Moses into his mother's arms, God has put your babies into your arms. He has given them to you to raise and care for.
0.198	Every child is placed in a mother's arms as something God trusts her with. She will have to answer to God for the way she treats that child.
0.199	No mother on God's earth has any right to raise her children just for pleasure.
0.200	She has no right to send them to dancing school and to places full of sin.
0.201	You have no right to do things that will bring a curse on your children.
0.202	That baby is placed in your arms so you can train it for the Lord.
0.203	A mother has no more right to raise her children for pleasure than I have to pick your pocket or throw red pepper in your eyes.
0.204	She has no more right to do that than a bank teller has to rob the vault and steal people's savings.
0.205	One of the worst sins you can commit is to be unfaithful with what has been trusted to you.
H:0.54	A Mother's Duty
0.206	"Take this child and take care of it for me."
0.207	That is your whole job with it.
0.208	That child is a jewel that belongs to God. He gives it to you to polish for Him so He can set it in a crown.
0.209	Who knows? Maybe Judas became the godless, worthless wretch he was because he had a godless, worthless mother.
0.210	Do you know? I sure don't.
0.211	What is more to blame for our crowded prisons than mothers?
0.212	And who is more to blame for the crowded brothels than you, who let your children run the streets with every Tom, Dick and Harry? You let them hang around with some little good-for-nothing whose character is so dark it would leave a black mark on a piece of tar paper!
0.213	I have talked with men in prisons who cursed their mothers right in front of me.
0.214	Why? Because they blame their mothers for the place they ended up in.
0.215	"Take the child and take care of it for me, and I will pay you your wages."
0.216	God pays in joy that fire can't burn, hunger can't touch and the devil can't steal.
0.217	He will pay you, so don't worry.
0.218	So make sure your name is on God's payroll.
0.219	"Take this child and take care of it for me, and I will pay you your wages."
0.220	If you haven't been doing that, then get your name on God's payroll now.
0.221	"Take this child and take care of it for me, and I will pay you your wages."
0.222	Then think of your responsibility! It is so great that I don't see how any woman could fail to be a Christian and serve God.
0.223	What do you think God will do if a mother fails?
0.224	The thought of it almost knocks me over.
0.225	What if, because you were unfaithful, your son becomes a curse and your daughter a disgrace?
0.226	What if, because you neglected him, that boy becomes a Judas when he could have been a John or a Paul?
0.227	Some years ago in Cincinnati, a mother went to the zoo. She stood leaning over the bear pit, watching the bears and tossing them crumbs and peanuts.
0.228	She was holding her baby in her arms. The baby was a year and three months old.
0.229	She was so busy watching the bears that the baby wriggled out of her arms and fell into the pit. She had to watch those huge beasts tear it to pieces.
0.230	For the rest of her life it will be a real hell for her to know that her little one died because of her own carelessness and neglect!
0.231	"Take this child and bring it up for me, and I will pay you your wages."
0.232	Will you make a promise, a solemn agreement, with God, with me and with one another? Will you promise that from now on, with God's help, you will try harder than ever before to raise your children for God?
0.233	"I once read a story about an angel who slipped out of heaven and came to this world one bright, sunny day. He wandered through fields, forests, cities and villages. As the sun went down, he got his wings ready for the flight home.
0.234	The angel said, "My visit is over. Before I go back, I must collect some souvenirs of my trip."
0.235	He looked at the beautiful flowers in the garden and said, "How lovely they are, and how sweet they smell!" He picked the rarest roses and made a bouquet. Then he said, "I can't see anything more beautiful and sweet-smelling than these flowers."
0.236	The angel looked further and saw a bright-eyed, rosy-cheeked child. He said, "That baby is prettier than the flowers. I'll take that too." Then, looking back at the cradle, he saw a mother's love pouring out over her baby like a gushing spring. The angel said, "That mother's love is the most beautiful thing I have seen!
0.237	I'll take that too."
0.238	With these three treasures the angel flew to the pearly gates of heaven. He said, "Before I go, I must look over the souvenirs of my trip to earth."
0.239	He looked at the flowers. They had wilted.
0.240	He looked at the baby's smile, and it had faded away.
0.241	He looked at the mother's love, and it was still shining with all its first beauty.
0.242	So he threw away the dead flowers and tossed aside the faded smile. Holding the mother's love close to his heart, he swept through the gates into the city. He shouted that the only thing he had found that kept its sweetness all the way from earth to heaven was a mother's love.
0.243	"Take this child and take care of it for me, and I will pay you your wages."
0.244	Someone once asked Napoleon Bonaparte, "What do you think France needs most?" He answered, "Mothers, mothers, mothers."
0.245	You women can turn a home into a hell or into a heaven.
0.246	Don't let your tongue loose like a machine gun, tearing into everybody. Don't tear into your husbands and drive them out of their homes.
0.247	If I wanted to find out how godly you really are, I would ask the girl who works for you.
0.248	All this talk about "the land of the free" doesn't count for much when the children look like a rummage sale in a secondhand shop. Their hair isn't combed, their pants are ripped, their buttons are missing and their stockings are hanging down.
0.249	You don't need great wisdom to see that Mother is too busy with her social events, her clubs and so on to pay much attention to the kids.
H:0.65	The Mothers of Famous Men
0.250	Nero's mother was a murderer, so it's no wonder he played the fiddle while Rome burned.
0.251	Patrick Henry's mother was a gifted speaker. That is why every schoolboy and schoolgirl knows his words, "Give me liberty or give me death."
0.252	Coleridge's mother taught him Bible stories from the pictures on the old Dutch tiles around the fireplace.
0.253	Today homes need authority more than at any other time in the history of this nation.
0.254	In the thick of the fight I have come up against every kind of man and beast you can imagine. And I am convinced that neither the law nor the gospel can build a nation without authority and good example in the home.
0.255	We need those two things.
0.256	A boy who has a healthy home and surroundings, with wise discipline too, doesn't often end up in reform school.
0.257	Susanna Wesley was the mother of nineteen children, and she kept them all for God.
0.258	When someone asked her how she did it, she answered, "I got hold of their hearts while they were young, and I never let go."
0.259	George Washington's mother argued hard against it. If she hadn't, George Washington would have become a young officer-in-training in the British navy, and the capital city over there would have some other name.
0.260	John Randolph said in the House of Representatives, "If it hadn't been for my godly mother, I, John Randolph, would have been an unbeliever."
0.261	Gray, who wrote the poem "Elegy in a Country Churchyard," said he was one of a large family of children who had the bad luck of outliving their mother.
0.262	And I believe the ideal mother is the fruit of a civilization that grew out of the manger in Bethlehem.
0.263	I am sure every angel in heaven would be glad to come to earth and have the honor of being a mother, if God would allow it.
0.264	What a wonderful thing it must be, at the end of your life on earth, to look back on a noble and godly life! You will know you did all you could to help leave this old world to God. You gave your tears and your prayers, and you taught your children to fear God. So when you are gone, your noble character will live on in your children.
0.265	I believe in blood. I believe in good blood and bad blood, honest blood and thieving blood, brave blood and cowardly blood. I believe in pure blood and immoral blood, in drinking blood and sober blood.
0.266	The lips of the Hapsburgs show immorality. The lips of the Stuarts show cruelty, prejudice and lust, from Mary, Queen of Scots, down to Charles I and Charles II, and James I—who showed the world what a foolish Scotsman can be like when he is a fool—all the way down to King James II.
0.267	Scottish blood means stubbornness.
0.268	They never quit.
0.269	I should know—Mrs. Sunday is completely Scottish.
0.270	English blood shows deep respect for the English.
0.271	You can see that from the fact that England recently spent $50,000,000 to put a crown on George's head.
0.272	Danish blood shows a love for the sea.
0.273	Welsh blood shows religious passion and eagerness for God.
0.274	Jewish blood shows a love of money, from Abraham's day until now.
0.275	You may have read this story. In New York there was a woman who said to her son, who was a drunk, "Let's go down to the police court and have the judge send you over to the island for a few weeks.
0.276	Maybe then you'll straighten out, and I can respect you again."
0.277	So they went down to the police court and stood before the judge.
0.278	He asked who was bringing the charge. The mother jumped forward, ready to speak.
0.279	Then she stopped short. She turned to her son, threw her arms around his neck and cried out, "I can't!
0.280	I can't! He is my son. I love him, and I can't."
0.281	Then she fell down dead at his feet.
0.282	She loved her drunken, bloated, lazy son so dearly that she could not stand up and judge him.
