0.1	“You adulterers, both men and women! Don’t you know that friendship with this world is hostility toward God?
0.2	So whoever wants to be a friend of the world is an enemy of God.” James 4:4.
0.3	1. In Paul’s letter to the Romans there is a passage that people have often thought means the same as this one: “Do not shape yourselves to fit this world” (Romans 12:2). But it has little or nothing to do with it. It speaks about something quite different.
0.4	In fact, people only think the two are alike because the word “world” is used in both places.
0.5	This naturally makes us think that Paul means by “fitting in with the world” the same thing James means by “friendship with the world.” But they are completely different things. In the original text the words are quite different too: Paul’s word is aion, and James’s word is kosmos.
0.6	Still, Paul’s words give God’s children an important direction.
0.7	It is as if he had said, “Do not shape yourselves to fit the wisdom, the spirit, or the fashions of your age. Do not copy either the unconverted Jews or the pagans you live among.
0.8	You are called to show by the whole direction of your life and conduct that you are ‘made new in the spirit of your mind,’ in the image of the One who created you. Show that your rule is not what people do or want, but ‘the good, acceptable, and perfect will of God.’”
0.9	2. But it is not surprising that James’s warning against friendship with the world is so poorly understood, even among Christians.
0.10	For as far as I can find, no writer, old or new, has written about this subject. No, not in sixteen or seventeen hundred years (as far as I have ever noticed).
0.11	Even that excellent writer Mr. Law, who has dealt so well with many other subjects, has not written one chapter on it in all his practical books. No, as far as I remember, he has not said one word about it or given one warning against it.
0.12	I have never heard one sermon preached on it, either before the University or anywhere else.
0.13	I have never been with any group of people where the conversation turned directly to this subject, even for one hour.
0.14	3. Yet there are very few subjects so deeply important. Few subjects touch so closely on the very heart of religion: the life of God in the soul. They concern whether that life continues and grows, or decays and even dies out.
0.15	Because people have not been taught about this, very sad results have followed.
0.16	These results have not affected people who were still dead in their wrongdoings and sins. But they have fallen heavily on many who were truly alive to God.
0.17	In particular, they have affected many of the people called Methodists—perhaps more than any other group.
0.18	Many of them did not understand the apostle’s advice (I hope that was the reason, rather than that they looked down on it). So many among them are sick—spiritually sick. And many who were once fully awake are now asleep.
0.19	It will be good if they ever wake up again before God demands their souls from them.
0.20	I have found it hard to explain something I have often seen. Many people were once very much alive to God. Their way of life was in heaven. Their hearts were set on things above, not on earthly things. They faithfully used all the ordinances of God. They were still full of good works. They stayed away from every known sin, and even from anything that looked like evil. And yet they slowly wasted away without noticing it, like Jonah’s plant when the worm ate its root. So now they are less alive to God than they were ten, twenty, or thirty years ago.
0.21	But it is easy to explain if we notice this: as they gained more possessions, they also grew in friendship with the world. And this must always happen, unless God’s mighty power steps in.
0.22	But as much as they grew in this friendship, the life of God in their souls shrank by the same amount.
0.23	4. Is it surprising that it shrank, if these words really are found in the very words of God: “You adulterers, both men and women! Don’t you know that friendship with the world is hostility toward God?”
0.24	What do these words mean?
0.25	Let us think about it seriously.
0.26	And may God open the eyes of our understanding! In spite of all the fog that the wisdom of the world would wrap around us, may we see clearly what God’s good and acceptable will is!
0.27	5. First, let us think about what the apostle means here by “the world.”
0.28	He is not talking here about the outward frame of things, which the Bible calls heaven and earth. He means the people who live on the earth—the children of men—or at least the larger part of them.
0.29	But which part? Our Lord himself and his beloved disciple both answer this fully.
0.30	First, our Lord himself.
0.31	He says, “If the world hates you, you know that it hated me before it hated you.
0.32	If you belonged to the world, the world would love you as its own. But you do not belong to the world. I have chosen you out of the world. That is why the world hates you.
0.33	If they have persecuted me, they will persecute you too.
0.34	They will do all these things to you because they do not know the One who sent me.”
0.35	(John 15:18.) You see that here “the world” is placed on one side. On the other side are those who “are not of the world.”
0.36	Some people God has “chosen out of the world,” namely by “the Spirit making them holy and by their believing the truth.” These are set directly against those whom he has not chosen in this way.
0.37	And again, our Lord says that those “who do not know the One who sent me”—those who do not know God—are “the world.”
0.38	6. The words of the beloved disciple are just as clear: “Do not be surprised, my brothers, if the world hates you. We know that we have passed from death to life, because we love the brothers.”
0.39	(1 John 3:13, 14.)
0.40	It is as if he said, “You must not expect anyone to love you except those who have ‘passed from death to life.’”
0.41	So it follows that those who have not passed from death to life, who are not alive to God, are “the world.”
0.42	We can learn the same thing from the words in the fifth chapter, verse 19: “We know that we belong to God, and the whole world lies in the evil one.”
0.43	[1 John 5:19] Here “the world” clearly means those who do not belong to God, and who therefore “lie in the evil one.”
0.44	7. On the other hand, those who love God belong to God. So do those who at least “fear him and keep his commandments.”
0.45	This is the lowest level of those who “belong to God.” They are not really sons, but servants. They turn away from evil and work hard to do good. They faithfully use all his ordinances. They do this because they have the fear of God in their heart and sincerely want to please him.
0.46	Fix this plain meaning of the words “the world” firmly in your heart: it means those who do not fear God in this way.
0.47	Do not let anyone fool you with empty words. It means no more and no less than this.
0.48	8. If we understand the word in this way, what kind of friendship may we have with the world?
0.49	We may, and we should, love them as we love ourselves, for they too are included in the word “neighbour.” We should truly wish them well. We should want them to be happy as sincerely as we want our own souls to be happy. Yes, in a sense we should even honour them (since the apostle tells us to “honour all people”). We honour them as creatures God has made. More than that, we honour them as spirits that will never die, who are able to know God, love him, and enjoy him forever.
0.50	We should honour them because they were redeemed by the blood of the One who “tasted death for every person.”
0.51	We should feel tender pity for them when we see them turning away from the mercies offered to them, wandering off the path of life, and rushing toward everlasting destruction.
0.52	We should never willingly hurt their feelings or cause them any pain. Instead, we should give them all the pleasure we can, as long as it is innocent. For we are told to “please all people for their good.”
0.53	We should never make their faults look worse than they are. Instead we should gladly recognise all the good that is in them.
0.54	9. We may, and should, always speak to them in the kindest and most courteous way we can.
0.55	We should not speak evil of them when they are not there, unless it is absolutely necessary—unless it is the only way we know to stop them from doing harm. Otherwise we should speak about them with all the respect we can, without going beyond the truth.
0.56	When we are with them, we should treat them with every courtesy. We should show them all the respect we can, without supporting them in their sin.
0.57	We should do them all the good we can—all the good they are willing to receive from us. In this we follow the example of the Friend of all, our Father in heaven. Until they are willing to receive greater blessings, he gives them the ones they are willing to accept. He “makes his sun rise on the evil and the good, and sends” his “rain on the just and on the unjust.”
0.58	10. “But then what kind of friendship may we not have with the world?
0.59	May we not spend time with ungodly people at all?
0.60	Should we avoid their company completely?”
0.61	Not at all. We have already said the opposite.
0.62	If we were not to mix with them at all, “we would have to leave the world.”
0.63	Then we could not show them the acts of kindness we have already mentioned.
0.64	We certainly may spend time with them. First, in business—in the many tasks of this life, according to the place in life where God’s providence has put us. Second, when politeness requires it—only we must be very careful not to carry it too far. Third, when we have a reasonable hope of doing them good.
0.65	But here too we especially need to be careful and pray a great deal. Otherwise we may easily burn ourselves while trying to pull other burning sticks out of the fire.
0.66	11. We can easily harm our own souls by slipping into a close attachment to any of those who do not know God.
0.67	This is the friendship that is “hostility toward God.” We cannot watch ourselves too carefully, so that we do not fall into this deadly trap. We must be careful that we do not, before we realise it, begin to take pleasure and delight in them.
0.68	We are only on safe ground when we can say with the psalmist, “All my delight is in the holy people on the earth, and in those who stand out in goodness.”
0.69	We should not have unnecessary conversations with them.
0.70	It is our duty, and it is wise, to be with them no more often and no longer than we strictly need to.
0.71	And the whole time we need to remember and follow the example of the one who said, “I kept my mouth as if with a bridle while the ungodly person was in front of me.”
0.72	We should not form any kind of tie with them beyond what is absolutely necessary.
0.73	When Jehoshaphat forgot this and formed an alliance with Ahab, what happened?
0.74	First he lost his wealth: “The ships” they sent out “were wrecked at Ezion-geber.”
0.75	He was not satisfied with this warning or with the warning of the prophet Micaiah. He insisted on going up with Ahab to Ramoth-gilead. And there he almost lost his life.
0.76	12. Most of all, we should tremble at the very thought of making a marriage covenant with anyone who does not love God, or at least fear him. Marriage is the closest bond of all.
0.77	This is the most horrible foolishness, the most tragic madness, that a child of God could ever fall into. For it involves every kind of tie with the ungodly that a Christian’s conscience requires him to avoid.
0.78	No wonder, then, that God forbids it so plainly, and that the command is so absolute and firm: “Do not be unequally yoked with an unbeliever.”
0.79	Nothing could be clearer.
0.80	This is especially true if by the word “unbeliever” we mean someone who is far from being a believer in the gospel sense. He cannot say, “The life I now live, I live by faith in the Son of God, who loved me and gave himself for me.” In fact, he does not even have the faith of a servant. He does not “fear God and do what is right.”
0.81	13. But why is friendship with the world so completely forbidden?
0.82	Why are we so strictly required to keep away from it?
0.83	There are two general reasons. First, it is a sin in itself. Second, it brings the most dreadful results.
0.84	First, it is a sin in itself—and not an ordinary sin, either.
0.85	According to God’s own words, friendship with the world is nothing less than spiritual adultery.
0.86	The Holy Spirit speaks to all who are guilty of it in these words: “You adulterers, both men and women.”
0.87	It clearly breaks our marriage covenant with God, because we love what God made more than God who made it. It flatly goes against that kind command: “My son, give me your heart.”
0.88	14. It is a sin of the most wicked kind. It shows not only that we do not know God, forget him, or pay no attention to him. It shows actual “hostility against God.”
0.89	It is openly and obviously hostility.
0.90	“Don’t you know,” says the apostle—can you really be unaware of this truth, so plain and so undeniable?—“that friendship with the world is hostility against God?”
0.91	And how terrible is the conclusion he draws from this!
0.92	“So whoever will be a friend of the world”—(if we translate the words correctly, they say, “Whoever wants to be a friend of the world”)—a friend of people who do not know God, whether he succeeds or not—by that very fact becomes an enemy of God.
0.93	This desire alone, whether it succeeds or not, gives him the right to that name.
0.94	15. And just as it is a sin in itself—a very wicked sin—it also brings the most dreadful results.
0.95	It often traps people again in the very sins they had “fully escaped.”
0.96	It usually makes them “share in other people’s sins,” even sins they do not commit themselves.
0.97	Little by little it weakens their hatred and fear of sin in general. In this way it makes them an easy victim for any strong temptation.
0.98	It leaves them open to all the sins of neglect that their worldly friends are guilty of.
0.99	Without their noticing it, it makes them less careful about private prayer, family worship, fasting, going to public worship, and taking the Lord’s Supper.
0.100	The people close to them do not care about any of these things, and that attitude will slowly influence them. Even if those people never say a word to recommend their own way of living (which is hardly likely), their example still speaks. And many times it is more powerful than any words.
0.101	Through this example they are drawn, without being able to help it and almost all the time, into useless talk—yes, even unloving talk. In the end they no longer “set a guard over their mouth and keep watch over the door of their lips.” They can join in gossip, tale-telling, and speaking evil of others without their conscience stopping them. They have grieved God’s Holy Spirit so often that he no longer corrects them for it. So their talk is no longer, as it once was, “seasoned with salt, and fit to give grace to those who hear.”
0.102	16. But these are not all the deadly results that come from close friendship with unholy people.
0.103	It not only keeps them from living rightly. It also directly tends to corrupt the heart.
0.104	It tends to create or increase in us all the pride and self-satisfaction, all the touchy readiness to take offence—yes, every disordered passion and wrong attitude—that their companions give in to.
0.105	Gently it leads them into the habit of pleasing themselves and not wanting to deny themselves. It makes them unwilling to bear or take up any cross. It makes them soft and delicate. It leads them into the wrong kind of shame and into the fear of people, which brings countless traps.
0.106	It pulls them back into the love of the world, into foolish and harmful desires, into the desires of the flesh, the desires of the eyes, and the pride of life, until these swallow them up.
0.107	So in the end these people are far worse off than they were at first.
0.108	17. Suppose the children of God join themselves to the people of the world. The worldly people may not try to make them like themselves (though we should never assume that). They may not even plan or want to. Yet they will actually do it, whether they plan it or try to or not. I do not know how to explain it, but it is a real fact: their very spirit is catching.
0.109	While you are near them, you tend to catch their spirit, whether they mean it or not. Many doctors have noticed that not only the plague and putrid or dangerous fevers, but almost every disease people can get, is more or less catching.
0.110	And no doubt all spiritual diseases are catching too, though in many different ways.
0.111	Some pass on the infection more quickly than others.
0.112	Either way, the person who already has the disease does not want or plan to infect anyone else.
0.113	The man who has the plague does not want or intend to pass his disease on to you.
0.114	But that does not make you safe. So keep your distance, or you will surely be infected.
0.115	Doesn’t experience show that it is the same with diseases of the mind?
0.116	Suppose proud people, vain people, hot-tempered people, and lustful people do not want or plan to infect you with their own diseases. Even so, it is best to keep your distance from them.
0.117	You are not safe if you come too close to them.
0.118	You will find (and it will be good if it is not too late) that their very breath is catching.
0.119	It has recently been discovered that every human body has an atmosphere around it. This naturally affects everyone who comes within its limits.
0.120	Isn’t there something like this with a human spirit?
0.121	If you stay long in their atmosphere, so to speak, you can hardly avoid being infected.
0.122	The infection spreads from soul to soul, just as it does from body to body, even when the sick people do not intend or want it to.
0.123	But is that a reasonable thing to suppose?
0.124	Isn’t it well known that people of the world (with very few exceptions) are eager to make their companions like themselves? Yes, and they use every means, with all their skill and effort, to get what they want.
0.125	So run for your life!
0.126	Do not play with fire. Escape before the flames catch hold of you.
0.127	18. But how many arguments people give for friendship with the world!
0.128	And how strong the temptations to it are!
0.129	We will look at the ones that are the most dangerous and also the most common.
0.130	Let us begin with the most dangerous one of all, which is also by no means rare.
0.131	Someone says, “I admit that the person I am about to marry is not a religious person.
0.132	She does not claim to be.
0.133	She does not think much about it.
0.134	But she is a beautiful creature.
0.135	She is very pleasant, and I think she will be a lovely companion for me.”
0.136	This is a trap indeed!
0.137	Perhaps it is one of the greatest traps human nature can fall into.
0.138	No human power can overcome a temptation like this.
0.139	Only the mighty power of God can make a way for you to escape from it.
0.140	And his power can set you completely free: his grace is enough for you.
0.141	But only if you work together with him—only if you deny yourself and take up your cross.
0.142	And whatever you do, you must do it at once!
0.143	Nothing can be done little by little.
0.144	Whatever you do in this important matter must be done in one stroke.
0.145	If it is to be done at all, you must cut off your right hand at once and throw it away!
0.146	This is no time to ask advice from flesh and blood!
0.147	Win at once, or perish!
0.148	19. Now let us turn it around.
0.149	Suppose a woman who loves God is courted by a pleasant man. He is refined, lively, and good company, and he suits her in every other way, though he is not religious. What should she do?
0.150	If she believes the Bible, it is clear enough what she should do.
0.151	But what can she do?
0.152	Isn’t this
0.153	A test too hard for human weakness?
0.154	Who can stand firm in such a trial?
0.155	Who can resist such a temptation?
0.156	No one except someone who holds tightly to the shield of faith and cries out earnestly to the Strong One for strength.
0.157	No one except a woman who gives herself to watching and prayer and keeps on at it with all perseverance.
0.158	If she does this, she will be a happy witness in the middle of an unbelieving world. She will show that just as “all things are possible with God,” so “all things are possible for her who believes.”
0.159	20. But a man or a woman may ask, “What if the person who wants to know me has a strong natural mind, trained by many kinds of learning?
0.160	Couldn’t I gain a lot of useful knowledge by spending time closely with him?
0.161	Couldn’t I learn many things from him and greatly improve my own mind?”
0.162	Of course you may improve your own mind, and you may gain a lot of knowledge.
0.163	But still, if he does not have at least the fear of God, you will lose far more than you gain.
0.164	For you can hardly avoid losing as much in holiness as you gain in knowledge.
0.165	And if you lose even one degree of holiness, inside or outside, all the knowledge you gain will not make up for it.
0.166	21. “But his fine, strong mind, improved by education, is not the main thing in his favour.
0.167	He has qualities worth more than these. He is remarkably good-natured. He has a kind and caring spirit, and he is very generous by nature.”
0.168	For these very reasons, if he does not fear God, he is infinitely more dangerous.
0.169	If you spend close time with a person like this, you will surely soak up his spirit.
0.170	You will hardly be able to avoid stopping exactly where he stops.
0.171	Nothing in all my life has been as hard for me as spending time with men like this (“good sort of men,” as people usually call them) without being harmed by them.
0.172	Oh, beware of them!
0.173	Spend time with them only as much as business requires, and no more. Otherwise, even if you do not feel any harm right now, they will slowly and without your noticing tie you to earthly things again. They will dampen the life of God in your soul.
0.174	22. It may be that the people who want to know you are not experienced in religion, yet they understand it well. So you often gain something from talking with them.
0.175	If that is really so (and I have known a few cases like this), it seems you may spend time with them—but only very rarely and very carefully. Otherwise you will lose more of your spiritual life than all the knowledge you gain is worth.
0.176	23. “But these people are useful to me in running my business in this world.
0.177	In fact, they are often necessary to me. I could hardly carry on my business without them.”
0.178	Cases like this often happen.
0.179	And this is certainly a good enough reason to have some dealings with people who do not fear God, perhaps even often.
0.180	But even this is no reason at all for you to form a close friendship with them.
0.181	And here you must take the greatest care. “Otherwise, even through the contact with them that is necessary, the grace of God may decrease in your soul while your fortune in the world increases.”
0.182	24. There may be one more reason that sounds convincing for being close to an unholy man.
0.183	You may say, “I have helped him.
0.184	I helped him when he was in trouble.
0.185	And he remembers it with thankfulness.
0.186	He respects and loves me, though he does not love God.
0.187	So shouldn’t I love him?
0.188	Shouldn’t I return love for love?
0.189	Don’t even pagans and tax collectors do that?”
0.190	My answer is: you should certainly return love for love. But that does not mean you should be close friends with him.
0.191	That would put your soul in danger.
0.192	Let your love pour itself out in constant and fervent prayer. Wrestle with God for him.
0.193	But do not let your love for him carry you so far that it weakens your own soul, or even destroys it.
0.194	25. “But must I not be close to my relatives, whether they fear God or not?
0.195	Hasn’t God in his providence entrusted them to me?”
0.196	Of course he has. But some relatives are nearer and some are more distant.
0.197	The nearest relatives are husbands and wives.
0.198	They have taken each other for better or for worse, so they must make the best of each other. For since God has joined them together, no one can separate them—except in the case of adultery, or when the life of one of them is in immediate danger.
0.199	Parents are almost as closely tied to their children.
0.200	You cannot leave them while they are young, because it is your duty to “train them up” with all care “in the way they should go.”
0.201	How often you should spend time with them when they are grown up is something Christian wisdom must decide.
0.202	Christian wisdom will also decide how long it is wise for children to stay with their parents, if it is their own choice.
0.203	In general, if they do not fear God, you should leave them as soon as it is convenient.
0.204	But wherever you are, make sure (if you can) that they do not lack what they need or what makes life comfortable.
0.205	As for all other relatives, even brothers or sisters, if they belong to the world you are not obliged to be close to them. You may be polite and friendly from a distance.
0.206	26. Let us grant that “friendship with the world is hostility against God.” Then it follows that the most excellent way to heaven—indeed the only way—is to avoid all close friendship with worldly people. But who has the determination to walk in this way? Who does, even among those who love or fear God? For only these people are concerned in this question.
0.207	I have known a few who were lights in a dark land, even in this matter. They did not and would not either start or keep up any friendship with people of the most refined and cultivated minds and the most attractive personalities. They refused simply because those people belonged to the world and were not alive to God. They refused even though those people could have increased their knowledge or helped them in business. They refused even though those people admired and respected them for the very religion that they themselves did not experience. You would hardly think this possible, but there are many examples of it today.
0.208	For conscience’ sake they steadily and firmly keep away from close friendship even with people like these.
0.209	27. Whoever you are, if you are a child of God by faith, go and do the same!
0.210	Whatever it costs, run from spiritual adultery.
0.211	Have no friendship with the world.
0.212	However much profit or pleasure tempts you, do not become close friends with worldly-minded people.
0.213	And if you already have such a friendship, break it off right away.
0.214	Yes, even if your ungodly friend is as dear to you as your right eye, or as useful as your right hand, do not ask advice from flesh and blood. Pluck out the right eye, cut off the right hand, and throw them away!
0.215	This is not a small matter.
0.216	Your life is at stake: eternal life or eternal death.
0.217	And isn’t it better to enter life with one eye or one hand than to have both and be thrown into the fire of hell?
0.218	When you did not know any better, God overlooked those times of ignorance.
0.219	But now your eyes are opened. Now the light has come. Walk in the light!
0.220	Do not touch tar, or you will be made dirty.
0.221	Whatever happens, “keep yourself pure!”
0.222	28. But whatever others do, whether they listen or refuse to listen, hear this, all of you who are called Methodists!
0.223	No matter how much you are pressed or tempted, have no friendship with the world.
0.224	Look around you, and see the sad results it has produced among your brothers!
0.225	How many of the mighty have fallen!
0.226	How many have fallen through this very thing!
0.227	They would not take any warning. They insisted on spending time, and close time, with earthly-minded people, until they “walked their steps back to earth again!”
0.228	Oh, “come out from among them!”—from all unholy people, however harmless they may seem—“and be separate.” At least be separate enough to have no close friendship with them.
0.229	Your “fellowship is with the Father and with his Son Jesus Christ.” So let your fellowship be with those, and only those, who at least sincerely seek the Lord Jesus Christ.
0.230	Then “you will be,” in a special way, “my sons and my daughters, says the Lord Almighty.”
