0.1	Genesis 3:15 — “I will make you and the woman enemies of each other. I will make your offspring and her offspring enemies too. Her offspring will bruise your head, and you will bruise his heel.”
0.2	As I read these words to you, I can speak to you the way the holy angels spoke to the shepherds who were watching their flocks at night: “Listen! I have wonderful news for you, news of great joy.”
0.3	That is because this is the very first promise of a Savior. God made it to Adam’s family, who had turned away from him.
0.4	We usually look for Christ only in the New Testament. But in one sense, Christianity is almost as old as creation itself.
0.5	It is amazing to see how God showed his Son to the human race step by step.
0.6	He started with the promise in our text. God’s chosen people lived by this promise until the time of Abraham.
0.7	To Abraham, God showed more of his eternal plan to rescue humanity.
0.8	After that, God spoke to our ancestors through the prophets at many different times and in many different ways. At last the Lord Jesus himself appeared in a human body. He came and lived among us.
0.9	Our first parents surely saw this first promise only dimly, compared with the great light we have now. Yet dim as it was, we can be sure they built their hope of eternal salvation on it. And by that faith they were saved.
0.10	How did they come to need this promise? And what does it mean, and how far does it reach? With God’s help, that is what I want us to think about now.
0.11	The fall of man is written too clearly for anyone to miss it. People who deny it actually prove it by denying it.
0.12	Even people who did not know God admitted it and were sad about it. They could see streams of corruption flowing through the whole human race. But they could not trace those streams back to where they began.
0.13	Before God revealed his Son, human beings were a puzzle to themselves.
0.14	In this one chapter, where our text comes from, Moses explains more than the whole human race could ever have figured out on its own. They could have studied forever and still not found it.
0.15	In the chapter before, Moses gave us a full account of how God spoke the world into being. He especially told how God formed man from the dust of the ground. God breathed the breath of life into him, and he became a living soul.
0.16	The three persons of the Trinity held a council about making this lovely creature.
0.17	The result of that council was: “Let us make man in our own image, so that he is like us.
0.18	So God created man in his own image. In the image of God he created him.”
0.19	Moses makes a point of repeating these words. He wants us to pay special attention to where we came from: our origin is from God.
0.20	No one has ever said so much in so few words. Only a man inspired by God could have done it.
0.21	But it is striking that Moses mentions our being made in God’s image only twice, and only briefly. It is as if he were saying, “Man was made with honor. God made him good and upright. ‘In the image of God he created them, male and female.’
0.22	But man fell so quickly, and became like the animals that die. In fact, he became like the devil himself. So it is hardly worth mentioning.”
0.23	We are not told how soon man fell after he was created. So if we try to set a time, we are claiming to know more than the Bible says.
0.24	Some people think man fell on the very same day he was made. I don’t think they have good enough reasons for that opinion.
0.25	The chapter before packs many events together. God made Adam’s wife. Adam gave names to the animals. God put him in the garden he had planted. I think all that took longer than one day.
0.26	But everyone agrees on this: “Man did not stand firm for long.”
0.27	How long or how short a time it was, I will not try to decide.
0.28	It matters more for us to ask how he came to fall from his firm position. We should also ask how the temptation that defeated him began and how it grew.
0.29	This chapter tells us about it in great detail. With God’s help, it will do us a lot of good to look at it closely.
0.30	“Now the serpent,” says the writer of this holy history, “was more crafty than any wild animal the Lord God had made. He said to the woman, ‘Really? Has God said you may not eat from every tree in the garden?’”
0.31	This was a real snake. But the one who was speaking was actually the devil. Perhaps that is why the devil is called “the old serpent.” He took over the serpent when he came to trick our first parents.
0.32	The devil was jealous of man’s happiness. Some think God made man to fill the place of the angels who had fallen.
0.33	God made man good and upright, with full power to stand firm if he chose to. So God was fair to allow him to be tempted.
0.34	If man fell, he would have no one to blame but himself.
0.35	But how could Satan make him fall?
0.36	He could not do it by force, so he tried to do it by trickery. He took over a serpent, which was more crafty than all the wild animals the Lord God had made. So people who are very clever but do not love God are just tools. The devil can use them any way he likes.
0.37	“And he said to the woman.”
0.38	This shows how crafty he was.
0.39	He spoke to the woman, the weaker one, while she was away from her husband. That made her easier to defeat. He asked, “Really? Has God said you may not eat from every tree in the garden?”
0.40	The devil must have said these words in response to something he saw or heard.
0.41	The woman was most likely standing near the tree of the knowledge of good and evil. (We will soon see her picking an apple from it.) Perhaps she was looking at it and wondering what was so special about that tree. Why were she and her husband forbidden to eat from it?
0.42	Satan saw this and wanted to draw her into a conversation. (If the devil can get us to talk with him instead of resisting him, he has already won a big step.) So he said, “Really? Has God said you may not eat from every tree in the garden?”
0.43	The first thing he tried to do was to get her to think harsh thoughts about God. This is how he usually deals with God’s children. “Really? Has God said you may not eat from every tree in the garden?
0.44	What! Did God plant a garden and put you in the middle of it just to tease you and confuse you?
0.45	Did he plant a garden and then forbid you to use any of its fruit at all?”
0.46	He could not have asked a trickier question to get what he wanted. Eve felt she had to answer and defend God’s goodness.
0.47	And so —
0.48	Verses 2 and 3.
0.49	The woman answered the serpent, “We are allowed to eat the fruit of the garden’s trees. But God told us about the fruit of the tree in the middle of the garden. He said, ‘Do not eat from it. Do not even touch it, or you will die.’”
0.50	The first part of her answer was good. “We are allowed to eat the fruit of the garden’s trees. God has not forbidden us to eat from every tree in the garden.
0.51	No, we may eat the fruit of the trees in the garden. (It seems this even included the tree of life, which was like a sacrament for man while he was still innocent.) There is only one tree, in the middle of the garden, that God has spoken about. He said, ‘Do not eat from it, and do not touch it, or you will die.’”
0.52	Here she begins to bend away from the truth. Sin begins to form in her heart.
0.53	By talking with the serpent, she has already taken in some of his poison. She should never have talked with him at all.
0.54	She could easily have guessed that no good being would ask her a question like that. No good being would try to plant such dishonoring thoughts about God in her mind.
0.55	So she should have run away from him. She should not have stayed to talk with him at all.
0.56	Right away the bad results show. She begins to soften God’s warning.
0.57	God had said, “On the day you eat from it, you will surely die.” Or, as it can also be put, “Dying, you will die.”
0.58	But Eve says, “Do not eat from it, and do not touch it, or you will die.”
0.59	We can be sure we are falling into temptation, and beginning to fall because of it, when we start to think God will not keep his word. That is, when we think he will not carry out the punishments he has warned will come on sin.
0.60	Satan knew this. So he cleverly
0.61	“said to the woman (verse 4), ‘You will not surely die.’” He said it in a sly, suggestive way: “You won’t really die.
0.62	Surely God will not be so cruel as to send you to hell just for eating an apple. That cannot be.”
0.63	How sad! How many people does Satan lead wherever he wants, like prisoners? He does it by flattering them that they will not really die. He tells them the pains of hell will not last forever. He tells them God is nothing but mercy. So, he says, God will not punish a few years of sin with misery that lasts forever.
0.64	But Eve found that God does exactly what he says. So will everyone who keeps on sinning with the false hope that they will not really die.
0.65	We can also understand the words as a flat statement, and that fits with what comes next. “You will not surely die. It is all a lie, just a scary story to keep you under control like slaves.”
0.66	For (verse 5) “God knows that on the day you eat it, your eyes will be opened. You will be like gods, knowing good and evil.”
0.67	What child of God can expect to escape being lied about, when God himself was slandered like this, even in paradise?
0.68	Eve’s mind must have been blinded to some degree. Otherwise she would not have let the tempter say such twisted things.
0.69	Look at the ugly colors God is painted in here!
0.70	“God knows that on the day you eat it, you will be like gods” (equal with God).
0.71	So the great temptation was this: from then on they would be under no one’s control. They would be equal to the God who made them, or even greater, knowing good and evil.
0.72	Eve could not tell what Satan meant by this. But she certainly understood it as some great privilege they would enjoy.
0.73	In the same way, Satan now shows sinners a path that seems right to them. But he does not tell them that the path ends in death.
0.74	To make this temptation stronger, Satan, or the serpent, probably picked an apple from the tree at that moment and ate it in front of Eve. That could lead Eve to think the serpent was smarter than the other animals, and could speak, mostly because he ate that fruit. So if the serpent had gained so much from it, she might expect to gain the same.
0.75	I think all this is clear. Otherwise, I do not see how it would make sense to say, “When the woman saw that it was good for food.”
0.76	How could she know it was good to eat unless she had seen the serpent eat it?
0.77	Now Satan begins to gain ground quickly.
0.78	Desire had taken root in Eve’s heart. Soon it would give birth to sin.
0.79	And when sin has formed, it gives birth to death.
0.80	Verse 6: “The woman saw that the tree was good for food and pleasing to the eyes. She saw that it was a tree to be wanted for making a person wise. So she picked some fruit from it and ate. She gave some to her husband too, and he ate.”
0.81	Our senses are like harbors where our spiritual enemies come ashore.
0.82	That is why holy Job’s decision is so important: “I have made a solemn agreement with my eyes!”
0.83	When Eve began to stare at the forbidden fruit with her eyes, she soon began to long for it in her heart.
0.84	She saw that it was good for food and pleasing to look at. (Here was the desire of the body and the desire of the eyes.) But above all, she saw it was a tree to be wanted for making a person wise. She wanted to be wiser than God meant her to be. In fact, she wanted to be as wise as God himself. So she took its fruit, and gave some to her husband who was with her, and he ate.
0.85	As soon as she had sinned herself, she became a tempter to her husband.
0.86	It is terrible when people who should help each other in the great work of being saved only push each other toward damnation. But that is how it is.
0.87	If we are good, we will stir others up to be good. If we do evil, we will lure others to do evil too.
0.88	What we do and what we teach others are closely connected.
0.89	So shouldn’t all of us be very careful not to sin in any way ourselves? Otherwise we may become the devil’s agents and trap even our closest and dearest family members. “She gave some to her husband who was with her, and he ate.”
0.90	How sad! This one single act of sin was a tangle of many crimes!
0.91	They completely refused to believe God’s warning. They were extremely ungrateful to their Maker. He had just planted this garden and put them in it, and he had given them such a glorious, far-reaching grant of rights.
0.92	They also completely ignored their descendants. They knew their children would stand or fall with them.
0.93	Here was the worst kind of pride: they wanted to be equal with God.
0.94	Here was the greatest contempt for his warning and his law. They believed and obeyed the devil instead of God. And they did all this just to satisfy their bodily appetite.
0.95	No one on earth has ever committed a crime this tangled. Only the devil’s own turning away from God and his rebellion could match it.
0.96	So what were the results of their disobedience?
0.97	Were their eyes opened?
0.98	Yes, their eyes were opened. But how sad!
0.99	They were opened only to see that they were naked.
0.100	For we are told (verse 7) “that the eyes of both of them were opened, and they knew that they were naked.”
0.101	They were naked of God. They were stripped of everything holy and good. They had lost the image of God that they had before.
0.102	Now they could rightly be called Ichabod, because the glory of the Lord had left them.
0.103	Oh, how low these sons of the morning fell!
0.104	They fell out of God and into themselves. Once they shared in God’s nature. Now they had the nature of the devil and of animals.
0.105	No wonder they knew they were naked, not only in body but in soul.
0.106	And how did they act now that they were naked?
0.107	Did they run to God for forgiveness?
0.108	Did they ask God for a robe to cover their nakedness?
0.109	No. They were now dead toward God. They had become earthly, driven by their bodies, and devilish. So instead of asking God for mercy, “they sewed or wove fig leaves together and made themselves aprons,” or things to tie around their waists.
0.110	This is a vivid picture of every person who has not been born again. We see that we are naked. In some way we even admit it. But instead of looking up to God for help, we patch together a goodness of our own, just as our first parents wove fig leaves together. We hope that will cover our nakedness.
0.111	But our own goodness will not hold up under God’s strict judgment. It will do us no more good than the fig leaves did for Adam and Eve. In other words, it will do us no good at all.
0.112	For (verse 8) “They heard the voice of the Lord God walking in the trees of the garden in the cool part of the day. And Adam and his wife (in spite of their fig leaves) hid from the Lord God among the trees of the garden.”
0.113	They heard the voice of the Lord God, or the Word of the Lord God. That is, the Lord Jesus Christ, who is “the Word who was with God, and the Word who was God.”
0.114	They heard him walking in the trees of the garden in the cool of the day.
0.115	Perhaps this was the time when Adam and Eve usually went, in a special way, to offer God an evening sacrifice of praise and thanks.
0.116	The cool of the day.
0.117	Maybe they sinned early in the morning or at noon. But God did not come to them right away. He waited until the cool of the day.
0.118	So if we want to correct others well, we should not do it when they are hot with anger. We should wait until the cool of the day.
0.119	But what a change we see here!
0.120	Before, they would have been glad to hear the voice of the one they loved. They would have met him with open arms and happy hearts. But now they hide among the trees of the garden.
0.121	How foolish this attempt was!
0.122	They must have been truly naked. Otherwise how could they think they could hide from God?
0.123	Where could they run from his presence?
0.124	But by their fall they had become enemies of God. Now they hated God their Maker and were afraid to talk with him.
0.125	Isn’t that our condition by nature too?
0.126	Yes, it certainly is. We work hard to cover our nakedness with the fig leaves of our own goodness. We hide from God as long as we can. We will not come to him. And we never would come, unless the Father came to us first, drew us, and gently pulled us to himself by his grace, just as he came to Adam first here.
0.127	Verse 9. “And the Lord God called to Adam and said to him, ‘Adam, where are you?’”
0.128	“The Lord God called to Adam.” (Otherwise Adam would never have called to the Lord God.) And he said, “Adam, where are you?
0.129	Why aren’t you coming to worship me as you usually do?”
0.130	Christians, remember this: the Lord keeps track when you fail to come to worship.
0.131	So whenever you are tempted to stay away, each of you should imagine that you hear the Lord calling you and saying, “O man, O woman, where are you?”
0.132	These words can be understood in another and better way: “Adam, where are you?”
0.133	What condition is your poor soul in?
0.134	This is the first thing the Lord asks a sinner and makes him realize, when God comes to him first and calls him by his grace in a way that truly works. He also calls him by name. Unless God speaks to us personally, and we know where we really stand, we will never value our rescue. We must see how poor, how miserable, how blind, and how naked we are. Only then will we value the redemption the dear Lord Jesus won for us by his death and his obedience.
0.135	“Adam, where are you?”
0.136	Verse 10. “He answered, ‘I heard your voice in the garden, and I was afraid.’”
0.137	See what cowards sin makes us!
0.138	If we had no sin, we would have no fear.
0.139	“Because I was naked. So I hid.”
0.140	Verse 11: “And he said, ‘Who told you that you were naked?
0.141	Have you eaten from the tree that I (your Maker and Lawgiver) commanded you not to eat from?’”
0.142	God knew very well that Adam was naked and had eaten the forbidden fruit. But God wanted to hear it from Adam’s own mouth.
0.143	In the same way, God knows everything we need before we ask. Yet he still insists that we ask for his grace and confess our sins.
0.144	For when we do this, we admit that we depend on God. We take the shame on ourselves. And in this way we give glory to his great name.
0.145	Verse 12. “The man said, ‘The woman you gave to be with me, she gave me fruit from the tree, and I ate.’”
0.146	Human nature has never been painted more clearly.
0.147	Look at the pride Adam picked up through the fall!
0.148	How unwilling he is to take the blame or the shame himself!
0.149	This answer is full of disrespect toward God, hostility toward his wife, and dishonesty about himself.
0.150	In it he quietly blames God.
0.151	“The woman you gave to be with me.”
0.152	It is as if he said, “If you had not given me that woman, I would not have eaten the forbidden fruit.”
0.153	People do the same thing when they sin. They blame their passions. Then they blame God and find fault with him for giving them those passions.
0.154	What they are saying is, “The desires you gave us fooled us. That is why we sinned against you.”
0.155	But God still punished Adam for listening to his wife. In the same way he will punish those who follow what their sinful desires tell them.
0.156	For God forces no one to sin.
0.157	Adam could have said no to his wife’s urging if he had wanted to.
0.158	In the same way, if we look up to God, we will find grace to help us when we need it.
0.159	The devil and our own hearts tempt us. But they cannot force us to give in unless our own wills agree.
0.160	So our damnation is our own fault. That will be plain to see on the great Judgment Day, no matter how boldly people talk back to God now.
0.161	Adam speaks disrespectfully about God, and he also speaks with hostility against his wife. “The woman,” or “this woman,” “she gave me.”
0.162	He puts all the blame on her and speaks of her with great contempt.
0.163	He does not say, “my wife” or “my dear wife.” He says, “this woman.”
0.164	Sin pulls apart even the closest hearts. It poisons holy friendship.
0.165	People who have been partners in sin here on earth will hate and condemn each other later, if they die without repenting.
0.166	All souls in hell accuse their brothers.
0.167	To some degree, it is like that even on this side of the grave.
0.168	“The woman you gave to be with me, she gave me fruit from the tree, and I ate.”
0.169	What a dishonest speech this was!
0.170	He uses fifteen words to excuse himself. But he uses only one or two words (in the original language) to admit his fault—if you can even call it admitting.
0.171	“The woman you gave to be with me, she gave me fruit from the tree”—that is fifteen words. “And I ate.”
0.172	How unwillingly these last words come out!
0.173	How quickly he rushes through them!
0.174	“And I ate.”
0.175	But that is how a proud heart that has not been made new behaves. It will put the blame on its dearest friend in the world, and even on God himself, rather than take the shame itself.
0.176	Because of the fall, we all have this pride. Until our hearts are broken and made truly sorry by the Spirit of our Lord Jesus Christ, we will always be foolishly blaming God.
0.177	“I have sinned against you, and you alone, so that you are shown to be right in what you say, and clear of blame when you are judged.” Only people who, like David, are willing to admit their faults and are truly sorry for their sins talk this way.
0.178	That was not true of Adam. His heart was not broken. So he blamed his disobedience on his wife and on God, not on himself. “The woman you gave to be with me, she gave me fruit from the tree, and I ate.”
0.179	Verse 13. “And the Lord God said, ‘What is this that you have done?’”
0.180	What amazing concern God shows in this pleading question!
0.181	“What a flood of misery you have brought on yourself, your husband, and all your descendants!
0.182	What is this that you have done?
0.183	You disobeyed your God, obeyed the devil, and ruined your husband—the one I made you to be a helper for!
0.184	What is this that you have done?”
0.185	Here God wanted to wake her up to see her crime and her danger. So he thunders in her ears, as it were. For the law must be preached to sinners who think they are good enough.
0.186	We must be careful not to heal sinners before we see that they are wounded. Otherwise we will say, “Peace, peace,” when there is no peace.
0.187	Sinners who feel safe must hear the thunder of Mount Sinai before we bring them to Mount Zion.
0.188	I fear that those who never preach the law are not skilled at bringing the good news of the gospel.
0.189	Every minister should be a Boanerges, a son of thunder. He should also be a Barnabas, a son of comfort.
0.190	Elijah experienced an earthquake and a whirlwind before the small, still voice came to him. In the same way, we must first show people that they are condemned. Then we must show them how they can be saved.
0.191	But wisdom is needed to know how and when to preach the law, and when to apply the promises of the gospel.
0.192	“And the Lord God said to the woman, ‘What is this that you have done?’”
0.193	“The woman said, ‘The serpent tricked me, and I ate.’”
0.194	She does not use as many words to excuse herself as her husband did. But her heart is just as proud as his.
0.195	“What is this that you have done?” God asks.
0.196	Here God accuses her of doing it.
0.197	She does not dare deny it or say, “I didn’t do it.” But she takes all the blame off herself and puts it on the serpent. “The serpent tricked me, and I ate.”
0.198	She does not say, “Lord, it was my fault for talking with the serpent. Lord, I was wrong not to hurry to my husband when the serpent asked me the first question. Lord, I plead guilty. I alone am to blame. Oh, please don’t let my poor husband suffer for my wickedness!”
0.199	If she had now truly repented, that is what her heart would have said.
0.200	But both of them were equally proud now. So neither would take the blame. “The serpent tricked me, and I ate.
0.201	The woman you gave to be with me, she gave me fruit from the tree, and I ate.”
0.202	I have described this part of their behavior in extra detail for a reason. It shows so clearly how great God’s free grace is. And it plainly shows us that salvation comes only from the Lord.
0.203	Let us take a quick look at the miserable situation our first parents were now in. They were dead, both in the eyes of the law and in their spirits. They were children under God’s anger, and hell was what they would inherit.
0.204	They had eaten the fruit God had commanded them not to eat. And when they stood on trial before God, they would not admit it, even though their crime was made up of so many wrongs.
0.205	What reason could anyone give for not sentencing these prisoners on trial to death?
0.206	Everyone must admit they deserve to die.
0.207	In fact, how could God possibly forgive them and still be just?
0.208	He had warned that on the day they ate the forbidden fruit they would “surely die.” If he did not carry out this warning, then the devil really could slander the Almighty.
0.209	And yet mercy cries out, “Spare these sinners! Spare the work of your own hands!”
0.210	So look! Wisdom comes up with a plan for how God can be just and still be merciful. He can keep his word about the punishment, punish the crime, and at the same time spare the one who did it.
0.211	Here an amazing scene of God’s love opens before our eyes. It had been hidden in God’s heart from all eternity!
0.212	Adam and Eve were still proud. They did not ask for forgiveness even once. Yet God immediately passed sentence on the serpent and revealed a Savior to them.
0.213	Verse 14. “And the Lord God said to the serpent, ‘Because you have done this, you are under a curse, more than all the cattle and every wild animal. You will go on your belly, and you will eat dust every day of your life.’” That is, the serpent would be kept under control, and his power would always be limited and held back.
0.214	The Psalmist says, “His enemies will lick the very dust.”
0.215	(Verse 15.) “I will make you and the woman enemies of each other. I will make your offspring and her offspring enemies too. Her offspring will bruise your head, and you will bruise his heel.”
0.216	Before I explain this verse, I must point out a big mistake made by the author of The Whole Duty of Man. He claims that this verse contains a covenant between God and Adam. He treats it as if God were now making a personal agreement with Adam, as he did before the fall.
0.217	In his preface, where he talks about caring for the soul, he speaks about the second covenant. He says, “This second covenant was made with Adam, and with us in him, right after the fall. It is summed up in these words in Genesis 3:15, where God declares, ‘The offspring of the woman will break the serpent’s head.’ Like the first covenant, it was made up of some mercies to be given by God and some duties to be done by us.”
0.218	This is very false teaching. Those words were not spoken to Adam. They were spoken only to the serpent.
0.219	Adam and Eve stood there as criminals. God could not make an agreement with them, because they had broken his covenant.
0.220	And this is not at all a covenant in which “some mercies are to be given by God, and some duties to be done by us.” There is not one word here that points that way. It is only a declaration of the free gift of salvation through Jesus Christ our Lord.
0.221	From all eternity, God the Father and God the Son had made a covenant about saving God’s chosen people. In it God the Father promised that if the Son would offer his soul as a sacrifice for sin, he would see his offspring.
0.222	Now here this secret covenant is openly revealed. That is why God speaks so firmly and surely: “Her offspring will bruise your head, and you will bruise his heel.”
0.223	God had made an agreement with the first Adam before, and he proved unfaithful. So, to keep the second covenant from being broken, God put it into the hands of the second Adam, the Lord from heaven.
0.224	After the fall, Adam no longer stood as our representative. He and Eve were only private individuals, just as we are. All they could do was take hold, by faith, of the mercy God announced in this promise. They really did this, and that is how they were saved.
0.225	I am not saying that we don’t have to believe and obey if we are to be saved forever.
0.226	Faith and obedience are conditions, if all we mean is that they come before our salvation in order. But I deny that God offered these to Adam as terms. And I deny that God made a bargain with him in this promise, the way he did before the fall under the covenant of works.
0.227	How could that be? Adam and Eve were now prisoners on trial, with no strength to meet any conditions at all.
0.228	Here is the truth. As a reward for Christ’s sufferings, God promised to give his chosen people faith and repentance, to bring them to eternal life. Both of these, and everything else they need for their eternal happiness, are made completely certain for them in this promise. Mr. Rastan, an excellent Scottish minister, shows this clearly in his book called “A View of the Covenant of Grace.”
0.229	This is not a needless distinction at all. It is very important. Because people did not know this, they have been led astray for a long time. They have been taught that they must do this and that, as if they were under a covenant of works. Then, they were told, they would be saved for doing it.
0.230	Instead, people should be taught that the Lord Jesus was the second Adam, and that the Father made a covenant with him for fallen humanity. They should be taught that they can do nothing on their own or for themselves now. So they should come to God and beg him to give them faith. By faith they will be able to take hold of Christ’s righteousness. Then they will show that faith by their works, out of love and thanks to the ever-blessed Jesus, their most glorious Redeemer, for what he has done for their souls.
0.231	This is a plan that holds together and agrees with Scripture. If we do not hold to it, we will fall into one of two bad extremes: Antinomianism on one side or Arminianism on the other. May the good Lord rescue us from both!
0.232	But let’s go on. By the offspring of the woman we should understand the Lord Jesus Christ. He is truly God from true God. Yet for us and for our salvation, the Holy Spirit would prepare a body for him. He would be born of a woman who had never been with a man. By his obedience and death he would pay for man’s sin and bring in a righteousness that lasts forever. He would give his people a new nature. In this way he would bruise the serpent’s head—that is, destroy the serpent’s power and control over them.
0.233	By the serpent’s offspring we should understand the devil and all his children. God allows them to tempt and test his children.
0.234	But praise God, the devil can reach no further than our heel.
0.235	There is no doubt that Adam and Eve understood this promise this way. It is clear that sacrifices were set up later in this chapter.
0.236	Where else could those skins have come from, which God made into clothes for them, except from animals killed as sacrifices?
0.237	In the next chapter we find Abel, and Cain too, offering sacrifices. And the apostle tells us that Abel did it by faith—no doubt faith in this promise.
0.238	And when Cain was born, Eve said, “I have gotten a man from the Lord.” Or, as Mr. Henry points out, it could be translated, “I have gotten a man—the Lord—the promised Messiah.”
0.239	Some go further and think Eve was the first believer. So they translate it like this: “The offspring (not of the woman, but) of this woman.” This makes the grace of God look even greater. The woman who was first to sin would be the first to share in redemption.
0.240	Adam believed too, and was saved. For the Lord God made clothes out of skins for Adam and his wife and dressed them. This was a remarkable picture of how they would be clothed with the righteousness of our Lord Jesus Christ.
0.241	This promise came true, word for word, in the person of our Lord Jesus Christ.
0.242	Satan bruised his heel when he tempted him for forty days in a row in the wilderness. He bruised his heel when he stirred up fierce persecution against him while he was preaching in public. He bruised his heel in a special way in the garden, when our Lord said his soul was so full of sorrow that he could die, and he sweated great drops of blood that fell on the ground. He bruised his heel when he put the idea into Judas’s heart to betray him. And he bruised him most of all when his agents nailed him to a cursed tree, and our Lord cried out, “My God, my God, why have you deserted me?”
0.243	Yet in all this, the blessed Jesus, the offspring of the woman, bruised Satan’s cursed head. Because he himself was tempted, he was able to help those who are tempted.
0.244	We are healed by the lashes he took.
0.245	He carried the punishment that gives us peace.
0.246	By dying he destroyed the one who had the power of death, that is, the devil.
0.247	By doing this he stripped the rulers and powers of their weapons. He put them on open display and triumphed over them on the cross.
