0.1	1 Corinthians 13:8 — “Charity never fails.”
0.2	Nothing is more valuable or more worthy of praise than charity. And yet no duty is practiced less.
0.3	We often pretend to feel concern and pity for the misery and trouble of other people. But we rarely feel for them enough to help them as much as we are able. Unless we give them what they need, for the body as well as for the soul, all our good wishes are just empty words. They are worth nothing and deserve no respect. When we hear that other people are in a terrible situation, whether they are friends or enemies, it is our duty as Christians to help them as much as we possibly can.
0.4	Of course, my brothers, we should not harm ourselves or our families. That is not the charity that St. Paul praises so highly. No, but if we are able in any way to help them without harming ourselves or our families, then it is our duty to do it. And this charity never fails when it comes from the right motive and has the right goal.
0.5	In the chapter before this one, St. Paul had been showing that there are different spiritual gifts. God gave one blessing to one person and another blessing to another. There were many different blessings, but God did not give them to one person. He gave one person a blessing that he did not give to another. And he gave the other person a blessing or gift that could make him just as outstanding in one way as the first person's gift made him in another. But although there are these different spiritual gifts, they are all given for a wise purpose, namely, for the good of all. That is why they are given out in these different ways.
0.6	On the one hand, we must not hide the gifts God has given us. On the other hand, we must not waste them on our lusts and pleasures, to satisfy our bodily desires. Instead, they are to be used for the glory of God and the good of souls that will live forever.
0.7	After Paul explained this in detail, he goes on to show that all gifts are worth nothing unless we have charity, however great they may be in themselves. You can see this especially if you read this chapter from the beginning.
0.8	But before I go on, I will tell you what the apostle means by charity. He means love. If there is true love, there will be charity. We will try hard to help and support others as far as God has blessed us with the means to do so. The apostle praises this very highly. So let us see how valuable this charity is, and how praiseworthy it is in all who practice it. I will do the following:
0.9	I. Look at this blessing as it relates to people's bodies.
0.10	II. Show how much more valuable it is when it relates to people's souls.
0.11	III. Show you when your charity is the right kind.
0.12	IV. Explain why this charity, or the grace of love, never fails.
0.13	V. End with an appeal to everyone, high and low, rich and poor, all together, to keep practicing this valuable and praiseworthy duty.
0.14	First, I will look at this duty as it relates to people's bodies. And,
0.15	1. Oh, if only the rich would think about how praiseworthy it is to help other people!
0.16	We were created to help each other. God has made no one so independent that he does not need help from someone else. The richest and most powerful man on earth needs the help and support of the people around him. He may be great today, but a thousand accidents could bring him low tomorrow. The man who is rolling in plenty today may be just as needy tomorrow.
0.17	If our rich men were more generous to their poor friends and neighbors, it would help win them the favor of others if God's providence ever turned against them. But sadly, our great men would much rather spend their money at the theater, at a ball, at a fancy gathering, or at a masked ball than help a poor, suffering servant of Jesus Christ.
0.18	They would rather spend their fortunes on their hawks and hounds, on their prostitutes, and on earthly, sensual, and devilish pleasures than comfort, feed, or help even one of their suffering fellow human beings.
0.19	When God demands their breath, what difference is there between the king on his throne and the beggar on the dunghill?
0.20	There is no difference in the grave, my brothers. And there will be none on the day of judgment.
0.21	You will not be excused because you had a large fortune and a fine house and lived with every pleasure the earth could give you. No, these things will be one of the reasons you are condemned. You will not be judged by how big your fortune is, but by how you have used it.
0.22	Right now you may think of nothing but your pleasures and delights, and of living in comfort and plenty. You never stop to think how many thousands of people would be glad to have what you are wasting and think nothing of.
0.23	I beg you, my rich brothers, think about the poor of the world. Think how good and praiseworthy it is to help those who are suffering.
0.24	Think how pleasing this is to God and how delightful it is to people. Think how many prayers will be said for your well-being by the people you help. Let this move you to give a little from the plenty God has blessed you with, to help his poor.
0.25	God could have put you in their low position and them in your high position. The only reason for this difference is that he was pleased to make it. Shouldn't this make you remember your fellow human beings who are suffering?
0.26	I beg you to think about which will serve you better on the day of judgment. Will it be the money you spent at horse races or cockfights, at plays or masked balls? Or will it be the money you gave to help your fellow human beings and the suffering members of Jesus Christ?
0.27	I beg you to think about how valuable and praiseworthy this duty is. Do not be angry with me for urging you like this. Jesus Christ himself and all his apostles praise this duty highly. I am speaking especially to you, my rich brothers. I plead with you to think about those who are poor in this world. Help them from time to time, whenever they need it.
0.28	Remember that a curse has been announced against the riches of those who do not use them to do good like this: “Listen, you rich people, weep and wail over the miseries that are coming on you. Your riches have rotted, your clothes are eaten by moths, your gold and silver have rusted. Their rust will be a witness against you and will eat your flesh like fire. You have piled up your treasure for the last day.”
0.29	You see the terrible woe announced against everyone who hoards up plenty of the things of this life without helping those who are in need of them. And the apostle James goes on to speak against those who have gained their wealth by cheating, as too many have done in our day.
0.30	“Look! The wages of the workers who harvested your fields, which you held back by cheating, are crying out. And the cries of those who harvested have reached the ears of the Lord God of Sabaoth.
0.31	You have lived in pleasure on the earth and indulged yourselves. You have fattened your hearts as in the day of slaughter.”
0.32	So if you keep living for the desires of the flesh, pampering your stomachs and making them your god, while the poor all around you are starving, God will make these things a witness against you. They will be like a worm in your souls and will gnaw at your consciences forever. So let me once more urge you to show charity to people's bodies. I beg you to remember what the blessed Lord Jesus Christ has promised to those who love his members in this way: “as they have done it to the least of his members, they have done it to him.”
0.33	I am not speaking for myself now. I am not asking you to support my little flock in Georgia. If I were, you might say, as many recklessly do, that I wanted the money for myself. No, my brothers, I am now asking you to care for the poor of this land: your poor neighbors, your poor friends, yes, even your poor enemies. They are the ones I am speaking for now. When I see so many starving in the streets and almost naked, my heart is moved with pity and concern. It moves me to think that many people who have the power to lend a helping hand close their hearts to compassion. They will not help their fellow human beings, even though these people are in the most terrible condition because they have nothing.
0.34	I have urged the rich among you in particular to show charity. Now I want to,
0.35	2. Second, urge this on another group among us. Instead of being the first to do acts of charity, they are usually the slowest. I mean the clergy of this land.
0.36	Good God! How amazing it is to think that those whom God has called to work in spiritual things should be so slow in this duty. Bitter experience teaches us that this is so.
0.37	Our clergy (that is, most of them) are only looking for promotion. They run here and there to get one paid church position after another. They pile up wealth, either to spend on the pleasures of life or to satisfy their bodily desires. Meanwhile, the poor of their flock are forgotten. Worse than that, they are scorned, hated, and looked down on.
0.38	My brothers, I am not speaking about all the clergy. No, thank God, there are some among them who hate such behavior and are willing to help those in need. But God knows these are very few, while many do not give a thought to the poor among them.
0.39	They can visit the rich and the powerful, but they cannot stand to have the poor in their sight. They forget the poor members of Jesus Christ, and they forget them on purpose.
0.40	They have left the old paths and turned onto a new, refined road, but this road is not approved by the word of God. They have sunk into a fancy way of behaving. But however fancy it is, it was not the practice of the apostles or of Christians in any age of the church. They visited and helped the poor among them. But how rare this is among us! How seldom do we find charity in a clergyman!
0.41	It grieves me to say these things, but sad experience proves that they are true. If all the clergy of this land were here, I would tell them boldly that they have not kept to the ways of charity, but have neglected their duty. Instead of “selling everything and giving to the poor,” they will not sell anything, and they give nothing at all to the poor.
0.42	3. Third, I urge those of you who are poor to be charitable to one another.
0.43	You may not have money or the things of this life to give to one another. But you can still help each other by giving comfort. You can encourage each other not to lose heart, even when you are low in the world. Or when someone is sick, you can help as much as your time and strength allow. Do not be unkind to one another. Do not hurt, annoy, or get angry with each other. That gives the world an advantage over you.
0.44	And if God moves anyone to help you, do not misuse what his providence has given you through the hands of some Christian. Always be humble and wait on God. Do not grumble or complain if you see others being helped and you are not. Keep waiting on the Lord, and help one another from time to time, as much as you are able.
0.45	I have shown you how valuable this is for people's bodies. Now I go on,
0.46	Second, to show you how much more valuable this charity is when it reaches people's souls.
0.47	And isn't the soul more valuable than the body?
0.48	It would do us no good to gain the whole world if we lost our souls. In fact, it would do us infinite harm.
0.49	The soul is of infinite value and matters infinitely. So we should show charity whenever we see it is needed. We should also correct, warn, and encourage with all godliness and love.
0.50	My dear brothers, we should use every means and every opportunity to save our own souls and the souls of others.
0.51	We may have a lot of charity and concern for the bodies of other people and yet give no thought to their souls that will live forever. But oh, how sad it is to care for the part that dies but not for the part that never dies! How sad to show charity to people's bodies while we have no concern for their eternal souls! We may even help them toward their ruin, while we care nothing about their being saved.
0.52	You may love to spend a fun evening with them, or go to a play or a horse race with them. But you cannot stand the thought of going to a sermon or a religious meeting with them. No, you would sing drinking songs with them, but you will not sing hymns with them. To you, this is not refined enough. It is unfit for a gentleman of taste and unfashionable. It is only done by a bunch of fanatics and madmen.
0.53	So you are uncharitable enough to join hands with those who are rushing toward their own damnation. But you are not charitable enough to help bring them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to God.
0.54	But this, my dear brothers, this is the greatest charity there can be: to save a soul from death. This does far more good than helping the body of another person. For even the most miserable person imaginable would be set free from all of it by death.
0.55	But for those who are not born again, death would be far from a release from all misery. It would be the doorway into all torment, and that forever.
0.56	So we should do everything we possibly can to keep a soul from falling into the hands of Satan. He is the great enemy of souls.
0.57	How this should stir you up to watch over your own souls and the souls of others!
0.58	For unless you are earnest with God, Satan will be too strong for you.
0.59	Surely it is the greatest charity to watch over one another's words and actions. Then we can warn each other when danger is near, or when the enemy of souls is coming.
0.60	If you have ever known the value of your own soul, and know what it is like to be snatched like a burning stick out of the fire, you will be eager for others to be rescued from that same condition.
0.61	Living a moral life, being honest, and paying everyone what you owe them do not prove that you are in a state of grace. They do not prove that you have been born again and made new in the spirit of your mind. No, you may die honest, fair, and charitable, and still not be saved.
0.62	The moral preaching that comes from most of our pulpits today is not enough to bring you from sin to God.
0.63	I saw that you were willing to learn, but you did not know that you must be born again. You did not know you must be made new, with all the old things gone and everything made new in your souls. My brothers, I could not bear to see you on the highway to destruction with no one to bring you back.
0.64	It was love for your souls and a desire to see Christ formed in you that brought me into the fields, the highways, and the hedges. I came there to preach Jesus to you, a crucified Jesus who died for you.
0.65	It was charity, yes, it was charity toward your souls, that has brought on me the harsh treatment I now receive from my brothers who are learned only in the letter.
0.66	So let me advise you to be charitable to one another's souls. Do this by urging them, with all love and tenderness, to follow Christ and the things that lead to their eternal peace, before those things are hidden from their eyes forever.
0.67	Now, in the third place, I will show when your charity is the right kind.
0.68	Here, my brothers, I will show first when it is not the right kind, and second when it is.
0.69	1. First, your charity is not the right kind when it comes from worldly motives or goals.
0.70	Perhaps you do it to be seen by people, or to get some advantage from them, or to be respected, or to gain a good reputation in the world. Or perhaps you are proud of it and expect God to reward you simply for doing it. If all or any of these is the goal of your charity, then it is all useless. Your charity does not come from the right motive. Instead, you are fooling your own souls.
0.71	If you give to the poor only so that people will notice, or because you expect God to favor you just because of it, then you do not care about God's glory or the good of other people. You care only about yourself. This, this is not charity. Nor,
0.72	Second, is it true charity when we give something to other people just to help them indulge in sin. This is so far from being charity that it is a sin against God and against our fellow human beings.
0.73	And yet it is as common as it is sinful to take our friends to one kind of entertainment or another, pretending it is charity, when all we want is to make them guilty of excess.
0.74	By doing this you are guilty of a double sin. We must not sin ourselves, and even less should we try to make someone else sin too. But,
0.75	Third, our charity comes from the right motive when it comes from love for God and is for the good of both the body and the soul of our fellow human beings.
0.76	When this is our only goal in helping suffering people, then our charity comes from the right motive, and we can expect to benefit from it. This is the charity that pleases God.
0.77	God is very pleased when everything we do comes from love: love for him and love for souls that live forever.
0.78	My dear brothers, think about this. It was love for souls that brought the blessed Jesus down from his Father's side. It was love that made him, who was equal in power and glory, come and take on our human nature. It was love that caused the Lord of life to die the painful, shameful, and cursed death of the cross.
0.79	It was love for souls that live forever that brought this blessed Jesus among us.
0.80	Oh, that this would help us see how great the value of souls was and still is! It was this that made Jesus bleed, gasp for breath, and die.
0.81	Surely souls must be of infinite worth, since they caused the Lamb of God to die such a shameful death.
0.82	Shouldn't this make you truly value souls?
0.83	The soul is worth more than anything. And this, this is the greatest charity, when it comes from love for God and love for souls.
0.84	This kind of charity will bring a satisfaction that lasts forever.
0.85	Oh, may this give you such a high regard for the value of souls that you will not miss any chance to do them good! Here is something truly worth showing charity to, because souls last forever.
0.86	So I earnestly beg you to think about the worth of souls that live forever, and to let your charity reach them too. Then, by your advice and warnings, you may be a tool in God's hands to bring souls to the Lord Jesus.
0.87	Next, fourth, I will consider why this charity, or grace of love, never fails.
0.88	It never fails because it comes from a God who never changes.
0.89	This does not mean that our charity is always the same. No, it can rise and fall like the tide, and it often does. But it never fails completely. No, the grace of love lasts forever.
0.90	There is, and there always will be, a charity toward everyone who has wandered and strayed away from God.
0.91	We cannot be at peace when we see souls on the highway to destruction unless we do everything we can to bring them back from sin and show them the terrible result of running into evil.
0.92	Christians cannot bear to see souls for whom Christ died perish because they lack knowledge. And if they see other people in bodily need, they will do everything in their power to help them.
0.93	Charity will never fail among those who truly love the Lord Jesus and know the value of souls. They will be charitable to those who are suffering.
0.94	So you see that true charity, if it comes from the right motive, never fails.
0.95	Now, my brothers, in the last place, I urge all of you, high and low, rich and poor, all together, to practice this valuable and praiseworthy duty of charity.
0.96	Riding around in your carriages, enjoying yourselves, and not thinking about the suffering of others is not praiseworthy. But helping your poor, suffering fellow human beings is valuable and praiseworthy wherever it is found.
0.97	But sadly, how very few of our fashionable, refined gentlemen think about their poor friends! Instead, they despise them and pay no attention to them.
0.98	They can indulge themselves in the foolish things of life. They would much rather spend their fortunes on lusts and pleasures, while the poor all around them are not considered worthy to be put with the dogs of their flock.
0.99	If you have plenty of the things of this world, you are welcomed as a companion by the refined and fashionable. But if you are poor, you must not expect any favor. Instead, you will be hated or considered unfit for company or conversation. And if you have plenty of the things of this life and do not need any help, then you have many people ready to help you.
0.100	My dear brothers, I have no doubt that your own experience proves what I am saying. It also proves that if anyone falls into trouble, those who promised to help completely forget their promise. They will even despise that person because Providence has frowned on him.
0.101	But this is not how people behave who are on their way to the heavenly Jerusalem. In this way our hearts and actions show that our lips are lying. For if we claim the name of Christ and do not turn away from all sin, we do not deserve to be considered real Christians.
0.102	For if we do not have charity, we are not Christians. Charity is the great duty of Christians. Where is our Christianity if we lack charity?
0.103	So I beg you to show charity to your fellow human beings who are suffering.
0.104	Truly, my dear brothers, this is really praiseworthy and really valuable. So I beg you, with hearts of tender mercy toward Christ, to think about his poor, suffering members. Practice, practice this charity, I beg you! If you have no compassion, you are not true disciples of the Lord Jesus Christ.
0.105	I humbly beg you to think about those who need help and truly have nothing, and to help them as much as you are able.
0.106	Remember, the kinder Providence has been to you, the more eager and earnest you should be to help those you find in trouble. What pleases your fellow human beings and doing your duty to God are matters of the greatest importance.
0.107	When you are called away from here, all riches and grandeur will be over. The grave makes no distinction. Great fortunes will mean nothing in the next world. If you have misused the talent God put into your hands, it will only make your condemnation worse on the great day of accounting. On that day God will come to demand your souls and to call you to account for how you used all the plenty of this life.
0.108	To conclude, let me beg each of you once more to act according to the circumstances of life that God has given you in his rich and free mercy.
0.109	Suppose you understood the great results that would come from acting in this charitable way, and saw it as a proof of your love for God, shown by loving his members. Then you could not have an uncharitable spirit. And you could not fail to help any of your fellow human beings who are suffering.
0.110	Think how easy it is for many of you to help someone in trouble by putting your small coins together. And who knows? The little you give may be what lifts someone out of trouble and into a thriving life. Then, if they have a truly Christian spirit, they can never thank God enough as the one who did it, and you as his instrument, for being such a good friend to them in their sad situation. Think also, once more, how much better your account will be on the day of judgment, and what peace of conscience you will enjoy.
0.111	How satisfying it must be to think that you have helped the widow and the orphan!
0.112	The Lord Jesus Christ recommends this, and it has been practiced in every age of the church. So, my brothers, be found doing this duty now.
0.113	I have spent more time on this because our enemies say we reject all moral actions. But, thank God, they speak against us without reason. We value moral actions highly. But we say that faith in Christ, the love of God, and being born again are worth infinitely more. Still, you cannot be true Christians unless you show charity to other people in trouble, whether they are friends or enemies.
0.114	So work hard at this duty, as the blessed Jesus has commanded. If you have true charity, you will live and reign with him forever.
0.115	Now to God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Spirit be all honor, power, glory, might, majesty, and dominion, now and forever. Amen.
