T:0	The Prologue
0.1	You remember, holy brethren, that the Gospel according to John, read in the regular course of lessons, is the subject on which we usually preach; but because of the solemnity of the holy days now intervening, on which certain lessons must be read in the Church—lessons which come round every year in such a way that they cannot be other than they are—the order which we had undertaken is of necessity interrupted for a little while, not wholly abandoned.
0.2	But when I was thinking what subject of discourse from the Scriptures, in keeping with the joy of these days, I might undertake with you during the present week, as the Lord shall be pleased to grant—one such as could be finished in these seven or eight days—the Epistle of blessed John came to my mind: so that, since we have for a while interrupted the reading of his Gospel, we may, in discoursing on his Epistle, not depart from his side; all the more because in this same Epistle, which is very sweet to all who have a healthy taste of the heart to relish the Bread of God, and very fit to be kept in remembrance in God’s holy Church, charity is commended above all.
0.3	He has spoken many words, and nearly all are about charity.
0.4	He who has in himself that which he is to hear cannot but rejoice at what he hears.
0.5	For this reading will be to that man like oil upon a flame: if there is something there that can be nourished, it is nourished, and grows, and endures.
0.6	Again, to some it ought to be like flame to fuel: so that if he was not burning, he may be set on fire by the added discourse.
0.7	For in some, what is there is nourished; in some, it is kindled, if it is not there: so that we may all rejoice in one charity.
0.8	But where there is charity, there is peace; and where there is humility, there is charity.
0.9	Now let us hear the man himself; and at his words, whatever the Lord suggests, let us speak that also to you, so that you may understand well.
T:1	Homily I (1 John 1:1–2:11)
1.1	“That which was from the beginning, which we have heard, and which we have seen with our eyes, and our hands have handled, concerning the Word of life: and the life was manifested, and we have seen, and bear witness, and show to you that eternal life which was with the Father and was manifested to us: the things which we have seen and heard we declare to you, that you also may have fellowship with us; and that our fellowship may be with the Father, and with His Son Jesus Christ.
1.2	And these things we write to you, that your joy may be full.
1.3	This, then, is the message which we have heard from Him and declare to you, that God is light, and in Him is no darkness at all.
1.4	If we say that we have fellowship with Him, and walk in darkness, we lie and do not do the truth; if we walk in the light, as He is in the light, we have fellowship with one another, and the blood of Jesus Christ His Son shall cleanse us from all sin.
1.5	If we say that we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in us.
1.6	If we confess our sins, He is faithful and just to forgive us our sins and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.
1.7	If we say that we have not sinned, we make Him a liar, and His word is not in us.
1.8	My little children, these things I write to you, that you may not sin.
1.9	And if anyone sins, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous; and He is the propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world.
1.10	And by this we know Him, if we keep His commandments.
1.11	He who says he knows Him, and does not keep His commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not in him.
1.12	But whoever keeps His word, in him truly the love of God is perfected.
1.13	By this we know that we are in Him, if we are perfect in Him.
1.14	He who says he abides in Him ought himself also to walk just as He walked.
1.15	Beloved, I write no new commandment to you, but an old commandment which you have had from the beginning.
1.16	The old commandment is the word which you have heard.
1.17	Again, a new commandment I write to you, which thing is true in Him and in you, because the darkness is past, and the true light now shines.
1.18	He who says he is in the light, and hates his brother, is in darkness even until now.
1.19	He who loves his brother abides in the light, and there is no occasion of stumbling in him.
1.20	For he who hates his brother is in darkness, and walks in darkness, and does not know where he is going, because the darkness has blinded his eyes.”
1.21	1. “That which was from the beginning, which we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes, and our hands have handled, concerning the word of life.”
1.22	Who is it that handles the Word with hands, except because “The Word was made flesh, and dwelt in us”?
1.23	Now this Word, which was made flesh so that it might be handled, began to be flesh from the Virgin Mary; but the Word did not begin then, for the apostle says, “That which was from the beginning.”
1.24	See whether his epistle does not bear witness to his gospel, where you lately heard, “In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God.”
1.25	Perhaps someone may take “Concerning the word of life” as a kind of expression about Christ, and not as the very body of Christ which was handled with hands.
1.26	See what follows: “And the Life was manifested.”
1.27	Christ, therefore, is “the word of life.”
1.28	And how was it manifested? For it was “from the beginning,” only not manifested to men; but it was manifested to angels, who saw it and fed on it as their bread.
1.29	But what does the Scripture say?
1.30	“Man ate angels’ bread.”
1.31	So then, “the Life was manifested” in the flesh; because it was set forth in manifestation, so that what can be seen by the heart alone might be seen by the eyes also, in order that it might heal the hearts.
1.32	For the Word is seen only by the heart; but the flesh is seen by the bodily eyes also.
1.33	We had the means to see the flesh, but had not the means to see the Word: “the Word was made flesh,” which we could see, so that there might be healed in us that by which we might see the Word.
1.34	2. “And we have seen and are witnesses.”
1.35	Perhaps some of the brethren who are not acquainted with Greek do not know what the word “witnesses” is in Greek; and yet it is a term used much by all, and held in religious reverence: for what in our language we call “witnesses,” in Greek are “martyrs.”
1.36	Now where is the man who has not heard of martyrs, or where is the Christian in whose mouth the name of martyrs does not dwell every day—and would that it dwelt so in the heart also, that we would imitate the sufferings of the martyrs, and not persecute them with our drinking cups!
1.37	So then, “We have seen and are witnesses” is as much as to say, We have seen and are martyrs.
1.38	For it was for bearing witness to what they had seen, and bearing witness to what they had heard from those who had seen, that—while their very testimony displeased the men against whom it was delivered—the martyrs suffered all that they did suffer.
1.39	The martyrs are God’s witnesses.
1.40	It pleased God to have men as His witnesses, so that men also may have God as their witness.
1.41	“We have seen,” he says, “and are witnesses.”
1.42	Where have they seen?
1.43	In the manifestation. What does “in the manifestation” mean?
1.44	In the sun, that is, in this light of day.
1.45	And how could He who made the sun be seen in the sun, except as “in the sun He has set His tabernacle; and He Himself, as a bridegroom going forth out of his chamber, rejoiced as a giant to run His course”?
1.46	He who was before the sun, who made the sun, He who was before the morning star, before all the stars, before all angels, the true Creator (“for all things were made by Him, and without Him nothing was made”), in order that He might be seen by eyes of flesh which see the sun, set His very tabernacle in the sun, that is, showed His flesh in the manifestation of this light of day; and that Bridegroom’s chamber was the Virgin’s womb, because in that virginal womb the two were joined, the Bridegroom and the bride, the Bridegroom the Word, and the bride the flesh; because it is written, “And the two shall be one flesh;” and the Lord says in the Gospel, “Therefore they are no longer two but one flesh.
1.47	And Isaiah remembers very well that they are two: for speaking in the person of Christ he says, “He has set a mitre upon me as upon a bridegroom, and adorned me with an ornament as a bride.”
1.48	One seems to speak, yet He makes Himself at once Bridegroom and Bride; because “not two, but one flesh”; because “the Word was made flesh, and dwelt in us.”
1.49	To that flesh the Church is joined, and so the whole Christ is made, Head and body.
1.50	3. “And we are witnesses, and show to you that eternal life which was with the Father and was manifested to us”—that is, manifested among us; which might be more plainly expressed, manifested to us.
1.51	“The things,” therefore, “which we have seen and heard we declare to you.”
1.52	They saw the Lord Himself present in the flesh, and heard words from the mouth of the Lord, and told them to us.
1.53	Consequently we also have heard, but have not seen.
1.54	Are we then less happy than those who saw and heard?
1.55	And how is it that he adds, “That you also may have fellowship with us”?
1.56	They saw, we have not seen, and yet we are their fellows, because we hold the faith in common.
1.57	For there was one who did not believe even upon seeing, and insisted on handling, and so believing, and said, “I will not believe unless I thrust my fingers into the place of the nails, and touch His scars.”
1.58	And He who always gives Himself to be seen by the sight of the angels did give Himself for a time to be handled by the hands of men; and that disciple did handle Him, and exclaimed, “My Lord and my God!”
1.59	Because he touched the Man, he confessed the God.
1.60	And the Lord, to console us who, now that He sits in heaven, cannot touch Him with the hand but only reach Him by faith, said to him, “Because you have seen, you have believed; blessed are those who have not seen, and yet believe.”
1.61	We are described here; we are the ones designated.
1.62	Then let the blessedness take place in us which the Lord foretold would take place; let us firmly hold what we do not see, because those who have seen tell us.
1.63	“That you also,” he says, “may have fellowship with us.”
1.64	And what great thing is it to have fellowship with men?
1.65	Do not despise it; see what he adds: “and that our fellowship may be with God the Father, and Jesus Christ His Son.
1.66	And these things,” he says, “we write to you, that your joy may be full.”
1.67	He means full joy in that fellowship, in that charity, in that unity.
1.68	4. “And this is the message which we have heard from Him, and declare to you.”
1.69	What is this? These same men have seen, have handled with their hands, the Word of life: He “was from the beginning,” and for a time was made visible and tangible, the Only-begotten Son of God.
1.70	For what did He come, or what new thing did He tell us?
1.71	What was it His will to teach?
1.72	Why did He do what He did—that the Word should be made flesh, that “God over all things” should suffer indignities from men, that He should endure being struck on the face by the hands which He Himself had made?
1.73	What would He teach?
1.74	What would He show?
1.75	What would He declare?
1.76	Let us hear: for without the fruit of the precept, the hearing of the story of how Christ was born and how Christ suffered is a mere pastime of the mind, not a strengthening of it.
1.77	What great thing are you hearing?
1.78	See to it with what fruit you hear.
1.79	What would He teach?
1.80	What would He declare? Hear. That “God is light,” he says, “and there is no darkness in Him at all.”
1.81	So far he has indeed named the light, but the words are dark: it is good for us that the very light which he has named should enlighten our hearts, and that we should see what he has said.
1.82	This is what we declare, that “God is light, and there is no darkness in Him at all.”
1.83	Who would dare to say that there is darkness in God?
1.84	Or what is the light?
1.85	Or what is the darkness? Lest perhaps he is speaking of such things as pertain to these eyes of ours.
1.86	“God is light.” Someone says, “The sun also is light, and the moon also is light, and a candle is light.”
1.87	It ought to be something far greater than these, far more excellent, and far more surpassing.
1.88	As far as God is distant from the creature, as far as the Maker from what He made, as far as Wisdom from that which is made by Wisdom, so far beyond all things must this light be.
1.89	And perhaps we shall be near to it, if we come to know what this light is, and apply ourselves to it, so that by it we may be enlightened; because in ourselves we are darkness, and only when enlightened by it can we become light, and not be put to shame by it, as we are put to shame by ourselves.
1.90	Who is he that is put to shame by himself?
1.91	He who knows himself to be a sinner.
1.92	Who is he that is not put to shame by it?
1.93	He who is enlightened by it.
1.94	What is it to be enlightened by it?
1.95	He who now sees himself to be darkened by sins, and desires to be enlightened by it, draws near to it; hence the Psalm says, “Draw near to Him, and be enlightened; and your faces shall not be ashamed.”
1.96	But you will not be shamed by it if, when it shows you to yourself as foul, your own foulness displeases you, so that you may perceive its beauty.
1.97	This is what He would teach.
1.98	5. And might it be that we are saying this over-hastily?
1.99	Let the apostle himself make this plain in what follows.
1.100	Remember what was said at the outset of our discourse, that this epistle commends charity: “God is light,” he says, “and in Him is no darkness at all.”
1.101	And what did he say above?
1.102	“That you may have fellowship with us, and our fellowship may be with God the Father, and with His Son Jesus Christ.”
1.103	But moreover, if “God is light, and in Him is no darkness at all, and we must have fellowship with Him,” then the darkness must also be driven away from us, so that light may be created in us; for darkness cannot have fellowship with light.
1.104	To this end, see what follows: “If we say that we have fellowship with Him, and walk in darkness, we lie.”
1.105	You also have the Apostle Paul saying, “Or what fellowship has light with darkness?”
1.106	You say you have fellowship with God, and you walk in darkness; “and God is light, and in Him is no darkness at all”: then how should there be fellowship between light and darkness?
1.107	At this point, therefore, a man may say to himself, What shall I do? How shall I be light?
1.108	I live in sins and iniquities.
1.109	There steals over him, as it were, a despair and sadness.
1.110	There is no salvation except in the fellowship of God.
1.111	“God is light, and in Him is no darkness at all.”
1.112	But sins are darkness, as the apostle says of the devil and his angels, that they are “rulers of this darkness.”
1.113	He would not call them rulers of darkness except as rulers of sins, having lordship over the wicked.
1.114	Then what are we to do, my brethren?
1.115	Fellowship with God must be had; there is no other hope of eternal life. Now “God is Light, and in Him is no darkness at all”; now iniquities are darkness; we are pressed down by iniquities, so that we cannot have fellowship with God: what hope do we have then?
1.116	Did I not promise to speak during these days about something that would cause gladness?
1.117	If I do not make that good, this is sadness.
1.118	“God is Light, and in Him is no darkness at all”; sins are darkness: what will become of us?
1.119	Let us hear whether perhaps He will console us, lift us up, give us hope, so that we do not faint along the way.
1.120	For we are running, and running to our own country; and if we despair of arriving, by that very despair we fail.
1.121	But He whose will it is that we arrive, so that He may keep us safe in our own land, feeds us along the way.
1.122	Let us hear, then: “If we say that we have fellowship with Him and walk in darkness, we lie, and do not do the truth.”
1.123	Let us not say that we have fellowship with Him, if we walk in darkness.
1.124	“If we walk in the light, as He is in the light, we have fellowship with one another.”
1.125	Let us walk in the light, as He is in the light, so that we may be able to have fellowship with Him.
1.126	And what are we to do about our sins?
1.127	Hear what follows: “And the blood of Jesus Christ His Son shall purge us from all sin.”
1.128	What great assurance God has given!
1.129	Well may we celebrate the Passover, in which the blood of the Lord was shed, by which we are cleansed “from all sin”!
1.130	Let us be assured: the devil held “the handwriting which was against us,” the bond of our slavery; but by the blood of Christ it is blotted out.
1.131	“The blood,” he says, “of His Son shall purge us from all sin.”
1.132	What does “from all sin” mean?
1.133	Mark this: see, even now, in the name of Christ whom these here have now confessed—those who are called infants—all their sins have been cleansed.
1.134	They came in old, they went out new.
1.135	How is it that they came in old and went out new?
1.136	Old men they came in; infants they went out.
1.137	For the old life is old age with all its dotage, but the new life is the infancy of regeneration.
1.138	But what are we to do?
1.139	The past sins are pardoned, not only to these but to us; and after the pardon and abolition of all sins, by living in this world in the midst of temptations, some perhaps have been contracted.
1.140	Therefore let man do what he can; let him confess himself to be what he is, so that he may be cured by Him who always is what He is: for He always was and is; we were not, and are.
1.141	6. For see what He says: “If we say that we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in us.”
1.142	Consequently, if you have confessed yourself a sinner, the truth is in you: for the Truth itself is light.
1.143	Your life has not yet shone in perfect brightness, because there are sins in you; but yet you have already begun to be enlightened, because the confession of sins is in you.
1.144	For see what follows: “If we confess our sins, He is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to purge us from all iniquity.”
1.145	Not only the past ones, but perhaps any we have contracted from this life; because a man, so long as he bears the flesh, cannot but have some sins, at any rate light ones.
1.146	But these which we call light, do not make light of.
1.147	If you make light of them when you weigh them, be afraid when you count them.
1.148	Many light sins make one huge sin: many drops fill the river; many grains make the lump.
1.149	And what hope is there?
1.150	Before all, confession: lest anyone think himself righteous, and man, who was not and is, lift up his neck before the eyes of God, who sees that which is.
1.151	Before all, then, confession; then, love: for what is said of charity?
1.152	“Charity covers a multitude of sins.”
1.153	Now let us see whether he commends charity with regard to the sins which afterward overtake us: because charity alone extinguishes sins.
1.154	Pride extinguishes charity: therefore humility strengthens charity; charity extinguishes sins.
1.155	Humility goes along with confession, the humility by which we confess ourselves sinners: this is humility—not to say it with the tongue, as if only to avoid arrogance, lest we should displease men if we should say that we are righteous.
1.156	This is what the ungodly and insane do: “I know indeed that I am righteous, but what shall I say before men?
1.157	If I call myself righteous, who will bear it, who will tolerate it? Let my righteousness be known to God: I, however, will say that I am a sinner, but only so that I may not be found odious for arrogance.”
1.158	Tell men what you are; tell God what you are. Because if you do not tell God what you are, God condemns what He shall find in you.
1.159	Would you not have Him condemn you?
1.160	Condemn yourself. Would you have Him forgive? Acknowledge, so that you may be able to say to God, “Turn Your face from my sins.”
1.161	Say to Him also those words in the same Psalm, “For I acknowledge my iniquity.”
1.162	“If we confess our sins, He is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to purge us from all iniquity.
1.163	If we say that we have not sinned, we make Him a liar, and His word is not in us.”
1.164	If you say, I have not sinned, you make Him a liar, while you wish to make yourself true.
1.165	How is it possible that God should be a liar and man true, when the Scripture says the contrary, “Every man a liar, God alone true”?
1.166	Consequently, God is true through Himself, you are true through God; because through yourself, you are a liar.
1.167	7. And lest perhaps he should seem to have granted impunity for sins, in that he said, “He is faithful and just to cleanse us from all iniquity,” and men should from then on say to themselves, Let us sin, let us do securely what we will, Christ purges us, He is faithful and just, He purges us from all iniquity—He takes from you an evil security, and puts in a useful fear.
1.168	To your own hurt you would be secure; you must be anxious.
1.169	For “He is faithful and just to forgive us our sins,” provided you always displease yourself, and keep changing until you are perfected.
1.170	Accordingly, what follows? “My little children, these things I write to you, that you may not sin.”
1.171	But perhaps sin overtakes us from our mortal life: what shall be done then?
1.172	What? Shall there now be despair?
1.173	Hear: “And if anyone sins, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous: and He is the propitiator for our sins.”
1.174	He, then, is the advocate; do your utmost not to sin: if from the infirmity of this life sin overtakes you, see to it immediately, immediately be displeased, immediately condemn it; and when you have condemned it, you will come with assurance to the Judge.
1.175	There you have the advocate: do not fear to lose your cause in your confession.
1.176	For if often in this life a man commits his cause to an eloquent tongue and is not lost, you commit yourself to the Word—and shall you be lost?
1.177	Cry out, “We have an advocate with the Father.”
1.178	8. See John himself observing humility.
1.179	Assuredly he was a righteous and a great man, who drank in the secrets of His mysteries from the Lord’s breast; he, the man who by drinking from the Lord’s breast wrote of His Godhead, “In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God”: he, being such a man as this, does not say, You have an advocate with the Father; but, “If anyone sins, an advocate,” he says, “we have.”
1.180	He does not say, you have; nor does he say, you have me; nor does he say, you have Christ Himself: but he puts forward Christ, not himself, and says also, “We have,” not, you have.
1.181	He chose rather to put himself among the number of sinners, so that he might have Christ for his advocate, than to put himself in Christ’s place as advocate and be found among the proud who shall be condemned.
1.182	Brethren, Jesus Christ the righteous, even Him we have as our advocate with the Father; “He,” even He, “is the propitiation for our sins.”
1.183	Whoever has held this fast has made no heresy; whoever has held this fast has made no schism.
1.184	For where did schisms come from?
1.185	When men say, “we” are righteous; when men say, “we” sanctify the unclean, “we” justify the ungodly; “we” ask, “we” obtain.
1.186	But what does John say?
1.187	“And if anyone sins, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous.”
1.188	But someone will say: then do the saints not ask for us?
1.189	Then do bishops and rulers not ask for the people?
1.190	Yes, but mark the Scriptures, and see that rulers also commend themselves to the prayers of the people.
1.191	Thus the apostle says to the congregation, “Praying also for us.”
1.192	The apostle prays for the people; the people pray for the apostle.
1.193	We pray for you, brethren; but you also pray for us.
1.194	Let all the members pray for one another; let the Head intercede for all.
1.195	Therefore it is no wonder that he here goes on to shut the mouths of those who divide the Church of God.
1.196	For he who has said, “We have Jesus Christ the righteous, and He is the propitiation for our sins,” with an eye to those who would divide themselves, and would say, “Look, here is Christ, look, there,” and would show in a part Him who bought the whole and possesses the whole, immediately goes on to say, “Not our sins only, but also the sins of the whole world.”
1.197	What is this, brethren?
1.198	Certainly “we have found it in the fields of the woods”: we have found the Church in all nations.
1.199	Behold, Christ “is the propitiation for our sins; not ours only, but also the sins of the whole world.”
1.200	Behold, you have the Church throughout the whole world; do not follow false justifiers who in truth are cutters-off.
1.201	Be in that mountain which has filled the whole earth: because “Christ is the propitiation for our sins; not only ours, but also the sins of the whole world,” which He has bought with His blood.
1.202	9. “And by this,” he says, “we know Him, if we keep His commandments.”
1.203	What commandments? “He who says, I know Him, and does not keep His commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not in him.”
1.204	But still you ask, What commandments?
1.205	“But whoever,” he says, “keeps His word, in him truly the love of God is perfected.”
1.206	Let us see whether this same commandment is not called love.
1.207	For we were asking, what commandments? and he says, “But whoever keeps His word, in him truly the love of God is perfected.”
1.208	Mark the Gospel, whether this is not the commandment: “A new commandment,” says the Lord, “I give to you, that you love one another.—By this we know that we are in Him, if we are perfected in Him.”
1.209	He calls them perfected in love: what is the perfection of love?
1.210	To love even enemies, and to love them for this end, that they may be brethren.
1.211	For our love ought not to be a carnal love.
1.212	To wish a man temporal well-being is good; but even if that fails, let the soul be safe.
1.213	Do you wish life to anyone who is your friend?
1.214	You do well. Do you rejoice at the death of your enemy?
1.215	You do ill. But perhaps both the life you wish your friend is not for his good, and the death you rejoice at has been for your enemy’s good.
1.216	It is uncertain whether this present life is profitable or unprofitable to any man: but the life which is with God is without doubt profitable.
1.217	So love your enemies as to wish them to become your brethren; so love your enemies that they may be called into your fellowship.
1.218	For so He loved who, hanging on the cross, said, “Father, forgive them, for they do not know what they do.”
1.219	For He did not say, Father, let them live long; they are indeed killing me, but let them live.
1.220	He was casting out from them the death which is forever and ever, by His most merciful prayer, and by His most surpassing power.
1.221	Many of them believed, and the shedding of the blood of Christ was forgiven them.
1.222	At first they shed it while they raged; now they drank it while they believed.
1.223	“By this we know that we are in Him, if we are made perfect in Him.”
1.224	Concerning the very perfection of love of enemies, the Lord, admonishing us, says, “Therefore be perfect, as your Heavenly Father is perfect.
1.225	He,” therefore, “who says he abides in Him ought himself also to walk just as He walked.”
1.226	How, brethren? What does he advise us?
1.227	“He who says he abides in Him,” that is, in Christ, “ought himself also to walk just as He walked.”
1.228	Is the advice perhaps this, that we should walk on the sea?
1.229	Far be that from us!
1.230	It is this, then: that we walk in the way of righteousness.
1.231	In what way? I have already mentioned it.
1.232	He was fastened to the cross, and yet He was walking in this very way: this way is the way of charity, “Father, forgive them, for they do not know what they do.”
1.233	If, therefore, you have learned to pray for your enemy, you are walking in the way of the Lord.
1.234	10. “Dearly beloved, I write to you no new commandment, but the old commandment which you had from the beginning.”
1.235	What commandment does he call “old?
1.236	Which you had,” he says, “from the beginning.
1.237	Old” then in this regard, that you have already heard it: otherwise he will contradict the Lord, where He says, “A new commandment I give to you, that you love one another.”
1.238	But why an “old” commandment?
1.239	Not as pertaining to the old man.
1.240	But why? “Which you had from the beginning.
1.241	The old commandment is the word which you have heard.”
1.242	Old, then, in this regard, that you have already heard it.
1.243	And he shows the very same to be new, saying, “Again, a new commandment I write to you.”
1.244	Not another, but the very same which he has called old is also new.
1.245	Why? “Which thing is true in Him and in you.”
1.246	Why old—you have already heard: that is, because you knew it already.
1.247	But why new? “Because the darkness is past, and the true light now shines.”
1.248	See, this is why it is new: because the darkness pertains to the old man, but the light to the new man.
1.249	What does the Apostle Paul say?
1.250	“Put off the old man, and put on the new.”
1.251	And again, what does he say?
1.252	“You were once darkness, but now light in the Lord.”
1.253	11. “He who says he is in the light”—now he is making clear all that he has been saying—“he who says he is in the light, and hates his brother, is in darkness even until now.”
1.254	What, my brethren! How long shall we say to you, “Love your enemies”?
1.255	See whether—what is worse—you do not hate your brethren.
1.256	If you loved only your brethren, you would not yet be perfect: but if you hate your brethren, what are you, where are you?
1.257	Let each look to his own heart: let him not keep hatred against his brother for any hard word; on account of earthly contention let him not become earth.
1.258	For whoever hates his brother, let him not say that he walks in the light.
1.259	“He who says he is in the light, and hates his brother, is in darkness even until now.”
1.260	Thus, some man who was a pagan has become a Christian; mark well: see, he was in darkness while he was a pagan; now he is made a Christian from here on; thanks be to God, all say joyfully; the apostle is read, where he says joyfully, “For you were once darkness, but now light in the Lord.”
1.261	Once he worshiped idols, now he worships God; once he worshiped the things he made, now he worships Him who made him.
1.262	He is changed: thanks be to God, all Christians say with joyful greeting.
1.263	Why? Because from now on he is one who adores the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit; one who detests demons and idols.
1.264	Yet John is still anxious about our convert: while many greet him with joy, he is still looked upon by John with apprehension.
1.265	Brethren, let us gladly welcome a mother’s anxious care.
1.266	Not without cause is the mother anxious about us when others rejoice: by the mother I mean charity; for she dwelt in the heart of John when he spoke these words.
1.267	Why, except that there is something he fears in us, even when men now hail us with joy?
1.268	What is it that he fears?
1.269	“He who says he is in the light”—What is this?
1.270	He who says he is now a Christian—“and hates his brother, is in darkness even until now.”
1.271	Which there is no need to expound, but only to be glad of it, if it is not so, or to bewail it, if it is.
