5.34	2. Mark these words now.
5.35	Still, I am pressing it upon you: see what straits we are put to, so that by the straining of your minds—that is, by your praying for us and for yourselves—God may make room and give us an outlet: lest some man find in His word an occasion of his own ruin, that word which was preached and put in writing only for healing and salvation.
5.36	“Everyone,” he says, “who does sin also does iniquity.”
5.37	Lest perhaps you make a distinction: “Sin is iniquity.”
5.38	Lest you say, I am a sinner, but not a doer of iniquity: “Sin is iniquity.
5.39	And you know that He was revealed for this purpose, that He should take away sin; and in Him there is no sin.”
5.40	And what does it profit us that He came without sin?
5.41	“Everyone who does not sin abides in Him; and everyone who sins has not seen Him, nor known Him.
5.42	Little children, let no one lead you astray.
5.43	He who does righteousness is righteous, just as He is righteous.”
5.44	This we have already said, that the word “as” is commonly used of a certain likeness, not of equality.
5.45	“He who does sin is of the devil, because the devil sins from the beginning.”
5.46	This too we have already said, that the devil created no man, nor begot any, but his imitators are, as it were, born of him.
5.47	“For this purpose the Son of God was revealed, that He might undo the works of the devil.”
5.48	Consequently, it is He who has no sin who comes to undo (or loose) sins.
5.49	And then follows: “Everyone who is born of God does not commit sin; for his seed remains in him; and he cannot sin, because he is born of God.” He has drawn the cord tight! Perhaps it is with regard to some one sin that he has said, “Does not sin,” not with regard to all sin: so that in his saying, “Whoever is born of God does not sin,” you may understand some one particular sin which the man who is born of God cannot commit; and that sin is such that, if one commits it, it confirms the rest.
5.50	What is this sin?
5.51	To act contrary to the commandment.
5.52	What is the commandment?
5.53	“A new commandment I give to you, that you love one another.”
5.54	Mark well! This commandment of Christ is called “love.”
5.55	By this love sins are loosed.
5.56	If this love is not kept, the failure to hold it is at once a grievous sin and the root of all sins.
5.57	3. Mark well, brethren; we have brought forward something by which, for those who understand well, the question is solved.
5.58	But do we walk the way only with those who run more swiftly?
5.59	Those who walk more slowly must not be left behind.
5.60	Let us turn the matter every way, in such words as we can, so that it may be brought within reach of all.
5.61	For I suppose, brethren, that every man is concerned for his own soul who does not come to church without cause, who does not seek temporal things in the Church, who does not come here to transact worldly business, but comes here in order to lay hold of some eternal thing promised to him, which he may attain: he must consider how he shall walk in the way, lest he be left behind, lest he go back, lest he go astray, lest by limping he fail to arrive.
5.62	Whoever, therefore, is in earnest, whether he be slow or swift, let him not leave the way.
5.63	This, then, I have said: that in saying, “Whoever is born of God does not sin,” it is probable he meant it of some particular sin; for otherwise it will contradict that passage: “If we say that we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in us.”
5.64	In this way, then, the question may be solved.
5.65	There is a certain sin which he who is born of God cannot commit; a sin which, when it is not committed, other sins are loosed, and when it is committed, other sins are confirmed.
5.66	What is this sin?
5.67	To act contrary to the commandment of Christ, contrary to the New Testament.
5.68	What is the new commandment?
5.69	“A new commandment I give to you, that you love one another.”
5.70	Whoever acts contrary to charity and contrary to brotherly love, let him not dare to boast and say that he is born of God; but whoever is in brotherly love, there are certain sins which he cannot commit, and above all this one, that he should hate his brother.
5.71	And how does it stand with him concerning his other sins, of which it is said, “If we say that we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in us”?
5.72	Let him hear from another place of Scripture that which will set his mind at rest: “Charity covers a multitude of sins.”
5.73	4. Charity, therefore, is what we commend; charity is what this Epistle commends.
5.74	The Lord, after His resurrection, what question did He put to Peter, but, “Do you love Me?”
5.75	And it was not enough to ask it once; a second time also He put no other question, and a third time also none other.
5.76	Although, when it came to the third time, Peter, as one who did not know the purpose of this, was grieved because it seemed as if the Lord did not believe him; nevertheless, a first time and a second and a third He put this question.
5.77	Three times fear denied; three times love confessed.
5.78	See, Peter loves the Lord.
5.79	What is he to do for the Lord?
5.80	For do not think that the one in the Psalm did not feel at a loss what to do: “What shall I render to the Lord for all the benefits He has done for me?”
5.81	He who said this in the Psalm noted what great things had been done for him by God; and he sought what he should render to God, and could find nothing.
5.82	For whatever you would render, you received from Him in order to render it.
5.83	And what did he find to offer in return?
5.84	That which, as we said, my brethren, he had received from Him—that alone he found to offer in return.
5.85	“I will receive the cup of salvation, and will call upon the name of the Lord.”
5.86	For who had given him the cup of salvation, but He to whom he wished to offer something in return?
5.87	Now to receive the cup of salvation and call upon the name of the Lord is to be filled with charity; and so filled that not only will you not hate your brother, but you will be prepared to die for your brother.
5.88	This is perfect charity, that you be prepared to die for your brother.
5.89	This the Lord displayed in Himself, who died for all, praying for those by whom He was crucified, and saying, “Father, forgive them, for they do not know what they do.”
5.90	But if He alone had done this, He was not a Master, if He had no disciples.
5.91	Disciples who came after Him have done this.
5.92	Men were stoning Stephen, and he knelt down and said, “Lord, do not lay this sin to their charge.”
5.93	He loved those who were killing him, since for them also he was dying.
5.94	Hear also the Apostle Paul: “And I myself,” he says, “will be spent for your souls.”
5.95	For he was among those for whom Stephen, when he was dying at their hands, begged forgiveness.
5.96	This, then, is perfect charity.
5.97	If any man has such great charity that he is prepared even to die for his brethren, in that man charity is perfect.
5.98	But as soon as it is born, is it already quite perfect?
5.99	It is born that it may be made perfect; when born, it is nourished; when nourished, it is strengthened; when strengthened, it is perfected; when it has come to perfection, what does it say?
5.100	“For me to live is Christ, and to die is gain.
5.101	I wished to be dissolved and to be with Christ, which is far better; nevertheless, to remain in the flesh is needful for you.”
5.102	For their sakes he was willing to live, for whose sakes he was prepared to die.
5.103	5. And that you may know that it is this perfect charity which the man who is born of God does not violate, and against which he does not sin, this is what the Lord says to Peter: “Peter, do you love Me?”
5.104	And he answers, “I love.”
5.105	He does not say, If you love Me, show kindness to Me.
5.106	For when the Lord was in mortal flesh, He hungered and He thirsted; at that time, when He hungered and thirsted, He was received as a guest; those who had the means ministered to Him from their substance, as we read in the Gospel.
5.107	Zacchaeus received Him as his guest; he was saved from his disease by receiving the Physician.
5.108	From what disease? The disease of avarice.
5.109	For he was very rich, and the chief of the tax collectors.
5.110	Mark the man made whole from the disease of avarice: “Half of my goods I give to the poor; and if I have taken anything from any man, I will restore him fourfold.”
5.111	That he kept the other half was not in order to enjoy it, but to pay his debts.
5.112	Well, he at that time received the Physician as his guest, because there was weakness of the flesh in the Lord, to which men might show this kindness; and this because it was His will to grant this very thing to those who did Him kind service; for the benefit was for those who did the service, not for Him.
5.113	For could He to whom angels ministered require these men’s kindness?
5.114	Not even His servant Elijah, to whom on a certain occasion He sent bread and meat by the ravens, had need of this; and yet, that a devout widow might be blessed, the servant of God is sent, and he whom God fed in secret is fed by the widow.
5.115	But still, although by means of these servants of God those who consider their need do good to themselves, in respect of that reward most plainly set forth by the Lord in the Gospel—“He who receives a righteous man in the name of a righteous man shall receive a righteous man’s reward; and he who receives a prophet in the name of a prophet shall receive a prophet’s reward; and whoever gives one of these little ones only a cup of cold water to drink in the name of a disciple, truly I say to you, he shall by no means lose his reward”—although, then, those who do this do it for their own good, yet this kind service could not be done to Him when He was about to ascend into heaven.
5.116	What could Peter, who loved Him, render to Him?
5.117	Hear what. “Feed My sheep”: that is, do for the brethren what I have done for you.
5.118	I redeemed all with My blood: do not hesitate to die for the confession of the truth, so that the rest may imitate you.
5.119	6. But this, as we have said, brethren, is perfect charity.
5.120	He who is born of God has it.
5.121	Mark, my beloved, see what I say.
5.122	See, a man has received the Sacrament of that birth by being baptized; he has the Sacrament, and a great Sacrament—divine, holy, inexpressible.
5.123	Consider what a Sacrament!
5.124	To make him a new man by the remission of all sins!
5.125	Nevertheless, let him look well to the heart, whether that which is done in the body is thoroughly done there; let him see whether he has charity, and then say, I am born of God.
5.126	If, however, he does not have it, he indeed bears the soldier’s mark upon him, but he roams as a deserter.
5.127	Let him have charity; otherwise let him not say that he is born of God.
5.128	But he says, I have the Sacrament.
5.129	Hear the Apostle: “If I know all mysteries, and have all faith, so that I can remove mountains, and have not charity, I am nothing.”
5.130	7. This, if you remember, we gave you to understand when we began to read this Epistle: that nothing in it is so commended as charity.
5.131	Even if it seems to speak of various other things, it makes its way back to this; and whatever it says, it will bring all of it to bear upon charity.
5.132	Let us see whether it does so here.
5.133	Mark: “Whoever is born of God does not commit sin.”
5.134	We ask, what sin? Because if you understand it of all sin, it will contradict that passage, “If we say that we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in us.”
5.135	Then let him say what sin; let him teach us; lest perhaps I have rashly said that the sin here is the violation of charity, because he said above, “He who hates his brother is in darkness, and walks in darkness, and does not know where he is going, because the darkness has blinded his eyes.”
5.136	But perhaps he has said something in what comes afterward, and has mentioned charity by name?
5.137	See that this circuit of words has this end, has this outcome.
5.138	“Whoever is born of God does not sin, because His seed remains in him.”
5.139	The “seed” of God, that is, the word of God; hence the apostle says, “I have begotten you through the Gospel.
5.140	And he cannot sin, because he is born of God.”
5.141	Let him tell us this; let us see in what we cannot sin.
5.142	“In this the children of God and the children of the devil are made manifest.
5.143	Whoever is not righteous is not of God, nor is he who does not love his brother.”
5.144	Yes, now indeed it is manifest what he speaks of: “Nor he who does not love his brother.”
5.145	Therefore love alone makes the difference between the children of God and the children of the devil.
5.146	Let them all sign themselves with the sign of the cross of Christ; let them all respond, Amen; let all sing Alleluia; let all be baptized, let all come to church, let all build the walls of churches: there is no telling the children of God from the children of the devil except by charity.
5.147	Those who have charity are born of God; those who do not have it are not born of God.
5.148	A mighty sign, a mighty distinction!
5.149	Have what you will; if this alone you do not have, it profits you nothing; if you do not have other things, have this, and you have fulfilled the law.
5.150	“For he who loves another has fulfilled the law,” says the apostle; and, “Charity is the fulfilling of the law.”
5.151	I take this to be the pearl which the merchant in the Gospel is described as seeking, who “found one pearl, and sold all that he had, and bought it.”
5.152	This is the precious pearl, Charity, without which whatever you may have profits you nothing; and if you have it alone, it is enough for you.
5.153	Now you see with faith; then you shall see with actual sight.
5.154	For if we love when we do not see, how shall we embrace it when we see!
5.155	But in what must we exercise ourselves?
5.156	In brotherly love. You may say to me, I have not seen God; can you say to me, I have not seen man?
5.157	Love your brother. For if you love your brother whom you see, at the same time you shall see God also; because you shall see Charity itself, and within dwells God.
5.158	8. “Whoever is not righteous is not of God, nor he who does not love his brother.”
5.159	“For this is the message”: mark how he confirms it: “For this is the message which we heard from the beginning, that we should love one another.”
5.160	He has made it plain to us that it is of this he speaks; whoever acts against this commandment is in that accursed sin into which those fall who are not born of God.
5.161	“Not as Cain, who was of that wicked one, and killed his brother.
5.162	And why did he kill him?
5.163	Because his own works were evil, and his brother’s righteous.”
5.164	Therefore, where envy is, brotherly love cannot be.
5.165	Mark, my beloved. He who envies does not love.
5.166	The sin of the devil is in that man, because the devil through envy cast man down.
5.167	For he fell, and envied him who stood.
5.168	He did not wish to cast man down so that he himself might stand, but only so that he might not fall alone.
5.169	Hold fast in your mind, from what he has added here, that envy cannot exist in charity.
5.170	You have it openly where charity was praised: “Charity does not envy.”
5.171	There was no charity in Cain; and had there been no charity in Abel, God would not have accepted his sacrifice.
5.172	For when they had both offered, the one of the fruits of the earth, the other of the young of the flock, what do you think, brethren—that God slighted the fruits of the earth, and loved the young of the flock?
5.173	God did not regard the hands, but saw into the heart; and whom He saw offering with charity, to his sacrifice He had respect; whom He saw offering with envy, from his sacrifice He turned away His eyes.
5.174	By the good works of Abel, then, he means only charity; by the evil works of Cain he means only his hatred of his brother.
5.175	It was not enough that he hated his brother and envied his good works; because he would not imitate him, he would kill him.
5.176	And by this it appeared that he was a child of the devil, and by this also that the other was God’s righteous one.
5.177	By this, then, men are discerned, my brethren.
5.178	Let no one mark the tongue, but the deeds and the heart.
5.179	If anyone does not do good for his brethren, he shows what he has in him.
5.180	By temptations men are proved.
5.181	9. “Do not marvel, brethren, if the world hates us.”
5.182	Must one keep telling you what “the world” means?
5.183	Not the heaven, not the earth, nor these visible works which God made, but lovers of the world.
5.184	By saying these things often, I am burdensome to some; but I am so far from saying it without cause that some may be asked whether I said it, and they cannot answer.
5.185	Let something, then, even by pressing it upon them, stick fast in the hearts of those who hear.
5.186	What is “the world”?
5.187	The world, when taken in a bad sense, is the lovers of the world; the world, when the word is used in praise, is heaven and earth and the works of God that are in them; hence it is said, “And the world was made by Him.”
5.188	Also, the world is the fullness of the earth, as John himself has said, “Not only for our sins is He the propitiator, but (for the sins) of the whole world”: by “the world” he means all the faithful scattered throughout the whole earth.
5.189	But the world in a bad sense is the lovers of the world.
5.190	Those who love the world cannot love their brother.
5.191	10. “If the world hates us, we know”—what do we know?—“that we have passed from death to life”—how do we know?
5.192	“Because we love the brethren.”
5.193	Let no one ask man; let each return to his own heart: if he finds brotherly love there, let him set his mind at rest, because he has “passed from death to life.”
5.194	Already he is on the right hand; let him not mind that for the present his glory is hidden; when the Lord comes, then he shall appear in glory.
5.195	For he has life in him, but as yet in winter; the root is alive, but the branches, so to speak, are dry; within is the substance that has life in it, within are the leaves of the trees, within are the fruits; but they wait for the summer.
5.196	Well then, “we know that we have passed from death to life, because we love the brethren.
5.197	He who does not love abides in death.”
5.198	Lest you should think it a light matter, brethren, to hate, or not to love, hear what follows: “Everyone who hates his brother is a murderer.”
5.199	What now—if anyone made light of hating his brother, will he also in his heart make light of murder?
5.200	He does not stir his hands to kill a man, yet he is already held by God to be a murderer; the other lives, and yet this man is already judged as his killer!
5.201	“Everyone who hates his brother is a murderer; and you know that no murderer has eternal life abiding in him.”
5.202	11. “In this we know love”: he means the perfection of love, that perfection which we have urged you to take to heart: “In this we know love, that He laid down His life for us; and we ought to lay down our lives for the brethren.”
5.203	See here where that came from: “Peter, do you love Me?
5.204	Feed My sheep.” For, that you may know that He wished His sheep to be fed by him in such a way that he would lay down his life for the sheep, He immediately said this to him: “When you were young, you girded yourself and walked where you wished; but when you are old, you shall stretch out your hands, and another shall gird you and carry you where you do not wish.
5.205	This He spoke,” says the evangelist, “signifying by what death he would glorify God”; so that the one to whom He had said, “Feed My sheep,” He might teach to lay down his life for His sheep.
5.206	12. Where does charity begin, brethren?
5.207	Attend a little: to what point it is perfected you have heard; its very end and its very measure is what the Lord has set before us in the Gospel: “Greater love has no man,” He says, “than that one lay down his life for his friends.”
5.208	Its perfection, therefore, He has set before us in the Gospel, and here also it is its perfection that is set before us; but you ask yourselves and say to yourselves, When will it be possible for us to have “this” charity?
5.209	Do not despair of yourself too soon.
5.210	Perhaps it is born and is not yet perfect; nourish it, so that it is not choked.
5.211	But you will say to me, And by what am I to know it?
5.212	For we have heard to what point it is perfected; let us hear where it begins.
5.213	He goes on to say: “But whoever has this world’s goods, and sees his brother hungry, and shuts up his heart of compassion from him, how can the love of God dwell in him?”
5.214	See, this is where charity begins!
5.215	If you are not yet equal to dying for your brother, be even now equal to giving your means to your brother.
5.216	Even now let charity strike your inmost heart, so that you do it not from vainglory but from the innermost marrow of mercy; that you consider him, now in want.
5.217	For if you cannot give your surplus to your brother, can you lay down your life for your brother?
5.218	There lies your money in your bosom, which thieves may take from you; and even if thieves do not take it, by dying you will leave it, even if it does not leave you while you live: what will you do with it?
5.219	Your brother is hungry, he is in need; perhaps he is in anxiety, distressed by his creditor; he is your brother, you are bought alike, one price was paid for you, you are both redeemed by the blood of Christ: see whether you have mercy, if you have this world’s means.
5.220	Perhaps you say, “What does it concern me?
5.221	Am I to give my money so that he may not suffer trouble?”
5.222	If this is the answer your heart gives you, the love of the Father does not abide in you.
5.223	If the love of the Father does not abide in you, you are not born of God.
5.224	How do you boast of being a Christian?
5.225	You have the name, and do not have the deeds.
5.226	But if the work follows the name, let anyone call you a pagan; show by deeds that you are a Christian.
5.227	For if by deeds you do not show yourself a Christian, all men may still call you a Christian; what does the name profit you where the thing itself is not to be found?
5.228	“But whoever has this world’s goods, and sees his brother in need, and shuts up his heart of compassion from him, how can the love of God dwell in him?”
5.229	And then he goes on: “My little children, let us not love in word, nor in tongue, but in deed and in truth.”
5.230	13. I suppose the thing is now made plain to you, my brethren: this great and most weighty secret and mystery.
5.231	What the power of charity is, all Scripture sets forth; but I do not know whether anywhere it is set forth more fully than in this Epistle.
5.232	We pray and beseech you in the Lord that you will both keep in memory what you have heard, and come with earnestness to what is yet to be said until the Epistle is finished, and hear it with earnestness.
5.233	But open your heart to the good seed; root out the thorns, so that what we are sowing in you is not choked, but rather that the harvest may grow, and that the Husbandman may rejoice and make ready the barn for you as for grain, not the fire as for chaff.
T:6	Homily VI (1 John 3:19–4:3)
6.1	“And by this we know that we are of the truth, and assure our hearts before Him.
6.2	For if our heart thinks ill of us, God is greater than our heart, and knows all things.
6.3	Beloved, if our heart does not think ill of us, then we have confidence toward God.
6.4	And whatever we ask, we shall receive from Him, because we keep His commandments and do in His sight the things that please Him.
6.5	And this is His commandment: that we should believe on the name of His Son Jesus Christ, and love one another, as He gave us commandment.
6.6	And he who keeps His commandments shall dwell in Him, and He in him.
6.7	And by this we know that He abides in us, by the Holy Spirit whom He has given us.
6.8	Dearly beloved, do not believe every spirit, but test the spirits whether they are of God, because many false prophets have gone out into this world.
6.9	By this the Spirit of God is known: every spirit that confesses that Jesus Christ has come in the flesh is of God; and every spirit that does not confess that Jesus Christ has come in the flesh is not of God; and this is the antichrist, of whom you have heard that he would come; and even now he is already in this world.”
6.10	1. If you remember, brethren, yesterday we closed our sermon at this sentence, which without doubt should have remained, and should still remain, in your heart, since it was the last you heard.
6.11	“My little children, let us not love only in word and in tongue, but in deed and in truth.”
6.12	Then he goes on: “And by this we know that we are of the truth, and assure our hearts before Him.”
6.13	“For if our heart thinks ill of us, God is greater than our heart, and knows all things.”
6.14	He had said, “Let us not love only in word and in tongue, but in work and in truth”; we are asked, In what work, or in what truth, is he known who loves God, or loves his brother?
6.15	Above he had said up to what point charity is perfected: what the Lord says in the Gospel, “Greater love than this has no man, that one lay down his life for his friends,” this same the apostle had also said: “As He laid down His life for us, we also ought to lay down our lives for the brethren.”
6.16	This is the perfection of charity, and a greater cannot be found at all.
6.17	But because it is not perfect in all, and the man in whom it is not perfect ought not to despair, if that which may be perfected is already born—and of course, if born, it must be nourished, and by certain nourishments of its own must be brought to its proper perfection—therefore we have asked concerning the beginning of charity, where it begins, and have immediately found there: “But whoever has this world’s goods, and sees his brother in need, and shuts up his heart of compassion from him, how does the love of the Father dwell in him?”
6.18	Here then, my brethren, this charity has its beginning: to give of one’s surplus to him who has need, to him who is in any distress; out of one’s temporal abundance to deliver one’s brother from temporal trouble.
6.19	Here is the first rising of charity.
6.20	If you nourish this, once it has thus begun, with the word of God and the hope of the life to come, you will come at last to that perfection, that you will be ready to lay down your life for your brethren.
6.21	2. But because many such things are done by men who seek other ends, and who do not love the brethren, let us come back to the testimony of conscience.
6.22	How do we prove that many such things are done by men who do not love the brethren?
6.23	How many in heresies and schisms call themselves martyrs!
6.24	They seem to themselves to lay down their lives for their brethren.
6.25	If they laid down their lives for the brethren, they would not separate themselves from the whole brotherhood.
6.26	Again, how many there are who for the sake of vainglory bestow much, give much, and seek in it only the praise of men and popular glory, which is full of wind and has no stability!
6.27	Since, then, there are such people, where shall the proof of brotherly charity be?
6.28	Since he wished it to be proved, and has said by way of admonition, “My little children, let us not love only in word and in tongue, but in deed and in truth,” we ask, in what work, in what truth?
6.29	Can there be a more evident work than to give to the poor?
6.30	Many do this from vainglory, not from love.
6.31	Can there be a greater work than to die for the brethren?
6.32	This also many would like to be thought to do, who do it from vainglory to get a name, not from the depths of love.
6.33	It remains that that man loves his brother who, before God, where God alone sees, assures his own heart, and questions his heart whether he does this truly for love of the brethren; and his witness is that eye which penetrates the heart, where man cannot look.
6.34	Therefore Paul the Apostle, because he was ready to die for the brethren, and said, “I will myself be spent for your souls,” yet, because God alone saw this in his heart, not the mortal men to whom he spoke, he says to them, “But to me it is a very small thing that I should be judged by you, or by man’s court.”
6.35	And the same apostle also shows in a certain place that these things are often done from empty vainglory, not upon the solid ground of love; for, speaking of the praises of charity, he says, “If I distribute all my goods to the poor, and if I deliver up my body to be burned, but have not charity, it profits me nothing.”
6.36	Is it possible for a man to do this without charity?
6.37	It is. For those who have divided unity are persons who do not have charity.
6.38	Look there, and you will see many giving much to the poor; you will see others prepared to welcome death, so much so that where there is no persecutor they cast themselves down headlong: these, doubtless, do this without charity.
6.39	Let us come back, then, to conscience, of which the apostle says: “For our boasting is this, the testimony of our conscience.”
6.40	Let us come back to conscience, of which the same apostle says, “But let each one prove his own work, and then he shall have boasting in himself, and not in another.”
6.41	Therefore let each one of us “prove his own work,” whether it flows forth from the vein of charity, whether it is from charity as the root that his good works sprout forth as branches.
6.42	“But let each one prove his own work, and then he shall have boasting in himself, and not in another”—not when another’s tongue bears witness to him, but when his own conscience bears it.
6.43	3. This, then, is what he enforces here.
6.44	“By this we know that we are of the truth, when in deed and in truth” we love, “not only in word and in tongue: and assure our heart before Him.”
6.45	What does “before Him” mean?
6.46	Where He sees. Hence the Lord Himself says in the Gospel: “Take heed that you do not do your righteousness before men, to be seen by them; otherwise you have no reward with your Father who is in heaven.”
6.47	And what does “Do not let your left hand know what your right hand is doing” mean, except that the right hand means a pure conscience, and the left hand the lust of the world?
6.48	Many through lust of the world do many wonderful things: the left hand works, not the right.
6.49	The right hand ought to work, and without the knowledge of the left hand, so that lust of the world may not even mix itself in when by love we do anything that is good.
6.50	And where do we come to know this?
6.51	You are before God: question your heart, see what you have done, and what your aim was in it—your salvation, or the windy praise of men.
6.52	Look within, for man cannot judge whom he cannot see.
6.53	If “we assure our heart,” let it be “before Him.”
6.54	Because “if our heart thinks ill of us”—that is, accuses us within, that we do not do the thing with the mind with which it ought to be done—“God is greater than our heart, and knows all things.”
6.55	You hide your heart from man: hide it from God if you can!
6.56	How will you hide it from Him, to whom a sinner, fearing and confessing, says, “Where shall I go from Your Spirit? And from Your face where shall I flee?”
6.57	He sought a way to flee, to escape the judgment of God, and found none.
6.58	For where is God not?
6.59	“If I ascend,” he says, “into heaven, You are there; if I descend into hell, You are there.”
6.60	Where will you go? Where will you flee?
6.61	Will you hear counsel?
6.62	If you would flee from Him, flee to Him.
6.63	Flee to Him by confessing, not from Him by hiding: hide you cannot, but confess you can.
6.64	Say to Him, “You are my place of refuge”; and let love be nourished in you, which alone leads to life.
6.65	Let your conscience bear you witness that your love is of God.
6.66	If it is of God, do not wish to display it before men; because neither men’s praises lift you up to heaven, nor their censures put you down from there.
6.67	Let Him see, who crowns you: let Him be your witness, by whom as judge you are crowned.
6.68	“God is greater than our heart, and knows all things.”
6.69	4. “Beloved, if our heart does not think ill of us, we have confidence toward God.” What does “If our heart does not think ill” mean?
6.70	If it answers us truly that we love and that there is genuine love in us—not feigned but sincere, seeking a brother’s salvation, expecting no gain from a brother, but only his salvation—“we have confidence toward God; and whatever we ask, we shall receive from Him, because we keep His commandments.” Therefore, not in the sight of men, but where God Himself sees, in the heart—“we have confidence,” then, “toward God; and whatever we ask, we shall receive from Him”—but only because we keep His commandments.
6.71	What are “His commandments”?
6.72	Must we always be repeating?
6.73	“A new commandment I give to you, that you love one another.”
6.74	It is charity itself that he speaks of; it is this that he enforces.
6.75	Whoever, then, has brotherly charity, and has it before God, where God sees, and whose heart, when questioned under righteous examination, gives him no other answer than that the genuine root of charity is there for good fruits to come from—that man has confidence with God, and whatever he asks, he shall receive from Him, because he keeps His commandments.
