7.70	4. “We are of God.”
7.71	Let us see why; see whether it is for any other reason than charity.
7.72	“We are of God: he who knows God hears us; he who is not of God does not hear us.
7.73	By this we know the spirit of truth, and of error”: namely by this, that he who hears us has the spirit of truth; he who does not hear us has the spirit of error.
7.74	Let us see what he advises, and let us choose rather to hear him advising in the spirit of truth, and not antichrists, not lovers of the world, not the world.
7.75	If we are born of God, “beloved,” he goes on—see above from what point: “We are of God: he who knows God hears us; he who is not of God does not hear us.
7.76	By this we know the spirit of truth, and of error”: yes, now he makes us eagerly attentive: to be told that he who knows God hears, but he who does not know Him does not hear; and that this is the discerning between the spirit of truth and the spirit of error: well then, let us see what he is about to advise; in what we must hear him—“Beloved, let us love one another.”
7.77	Why? Because a man advises it?
7.78	“Because love is of God.”
7.79	He has greatly commended love, in that he has said, “Is of God”: but he is going to say more; let us hear eagerly.
7.80	So far he has said, “Love is of God; and everyone who loves is born of God, and knows God.
7.81	He who does not love does not know God.”
7.82	Why? “For God is love” [Love is God].
7.83	What more could be said, brethren?
7.84	If nothing were said in praise of love throughout the pages of this epistle, if nothing whatever throughout the other pages of the Scriptures, and this one thing only were all we were told by the voice of the Spirit of God, “For Love is God,” we ought to require nothing more.
7.85	5. Now see that to act against love is to act against God.
7.86	Let no one say, “I sin against man when I do not love my brother (mark it!), and sin against man is a thing to be taken lightly; only let me not sin against God.”
7.87	How do you not sin against God, when you sin against love?
7.88	“Love is God.” Do “we” say this?
7.89	If we said, “Love is God,” perhaps one of you might be offended and say, What has he said?
7.90	What did he mean by saying that “Love is God”?
7.91	God “gave” love; as a gift God bestowed love.
7.92	“Love is of God: Love IS God.”
7.93	Look, here you have, brethren, the Scriptures of God: this epistle is canonical; it is read aloud throughout all nations, it is held by the authority of the whole earth, it has built up the whole earth.
7.94	Here you are told by the Spirit of God, “Love is God.”
7.95	Now, if you dare, go against God, and refuse to love your brother!
7.96	6. In what sense, then, was it said a while ago, “Love is of God,” and now, “Love IS God”?
7.97	For God is Father and Son and Holy Spirit: the Son, God of God; the Holy Spirit, God of God; and these three are one God, not three Gods.
7.98	If the Son is God, and the Holy Spirit is God, and that person loves in whom the Holy Spirit dwells: therefore “Love is God”; but “IS God,” because “Of God.”
7.99	For you have both in the epistle; both “Love is of God,” and “Love is God.”
7.100	Of the Father alone the Scripture does not say that He is “of God”; but when you hear that expression, “Of God,” either the Son is meant, or the Holy Spirit.
7.101	Because while the apostle says, “The love of God is poured out in our hearts by the Holy Spirit who is given to us,” let us understand that He who subsists in love is the Holy Spirit.
7.102	For it is this very Holy Spirit, whom the wicked cannot receive; He is that Fountain of which the Scripture says, “Let the fountain of your water be your own, and let no stranger share it with you.”
7.103	For all who do not love God are strangers, are antichrists.
7.104	And though they come to the churches, they cannot be numbered among the children of God; that Fountain of life does not belong to them.
7.105	To have baptism is possible even for a bad man; to have prophecy is possible even for a bad man.
7.106	We find that King Saul had prophecy: he was persecuting holy David, yet he was filled with the spirit of prophecy and began to prophesy.
7.107	To receive the sacrament of the body and blood of the Lord is possible even for a bad man: for of such it is said, “He who eats and drinks unworthily eats and drinks judgment to himself.”
7.108	To have the name of Christ is possible even for a bad man; that is, even a bad man can be called a Christian: like those of whom it is said, “They polluted the name of their God.”
7.109	I say, to have all these sacraments is possible even for a bad man; but to have charity and to be a bad man is not possible.
7.110	This, then, is the special gift; this is the “Fountain” that is uniquely one’s “own.”
7.111	The Spirit of God urges you to drink of this; the Spirit of God urges you to drink of Himself.
7.112	7. “In this the love of God was made manifest in us.”
7.113	See, in order that we may love God, we have exhortation.
7.114	Could we love Him, unless He first loved us?
7.115	If we were slow to love, let us not be slow to love in return.
7.116	He loved us first; not even so do we love.
7.117	He loved the unrighteous, but He did away with the unrighteousness: He loved the unrighteous, but He did not gather them together to unrighteousness: He loved the sick, but He visited them to make them well.
7.118	“Love,” then, “is God.”
7.119	“In this the love of God was made manifest in us, because God sent His only-begotten Son into the world, that we might live through Him.”
7.120	As the Lord Himself says: “Greater love than this no man can have, that a man lay down his life for his friends”: and there the love of Christ toward us was proved, in that He died for us: how is the love of the Father toward us proved?
7.121	In that He “sent His only Son” to die for us: so also the apostle Paul says: “He who did not spare His own Son, but delivered Him up for us all, how has He not with Him also freely given us all things?”
7.122	See, the Father delivered up Christ; Judas delivered Him up; does it not seem as if the thing done were of the same kind?
7.123	Judas is a “traditor,” one who delivered up [or, a traitor]: is God the Father that?
7.124	God forbid! you say.
7.125	I do not say it, but the apostle says, “He who did not spare His own Son, but ‘tradidit Eum,’ delivered Him up for us all.”
7.126	Both the Father delivered Him up, and He delivered up Himself.
7.127	The same apostle says: “Who loved me, and delivered Himself up for me.”
7.128	If the Father delivered up the Son, and the Son delivered up Himself, what has Judas done?
7.129	There was a “traditio” (delivering up) by the Father; there was a “traditio” by the Son; there was a “traditio” by Judas: the thing done is the same, but what is it that distinguishes the Father delivering up the Son, the Son delivering up Himself, and Judas the disciple delivering up his Master?
7.130	This: that the Father and the Son did it in love, but Judas did it in treacherous betrayal.
7.131	You see that what a man does is not the thing to be considered, but with what mind and will he does it.
7.132	We find God the Father in the same deed in which we find Judas; the Father we bless, Judas we detest.
7.133	Why do we bless the Father, and detest Judas?
7.134	We bless charity; we detest iniquity.
7.135	How great a good was conferred on mankind by the delivering up of Christ!
7.136	Did Judas have this in his thoughts, that he therefore delivered Him up?
7.137	God had in His thoughts our salvation, by which we were redeemed; Judas had in his thoughts the price for which he sold the Lord.
7.138	The Son Himself had in His thoughts the price He gave for us; Judas, in his, the price he received to sell Him.
7.139	The different intention, therefore, makes the things done different.
7.140	Though the thing is one, yet if we measure it by the different intentions, we find the one a thing to be loved, the other to be condemned; the one we find a thing to be glorified, the other to be detested.
7.141	Such is the power of charity.
7.142	See that it alone discriminates; it alone distinguishes the deeds of men.
7.143	8. This we have said in the case where the things done are similar.
7.144	In the case where they are different, we find a man made fierce by charity, and made winningly gentle by iniquity.
7.145	A father beats a boy, and a child-stealer caresses one.
7.146	If you name the two things, blows and caresses, who would not choose the caresses and decline the blows?
7.147	If you mark the persons, it is charity that beats, iniquity that caresses.
7.148	See what we are insisting upon: that the deeds of men are discerned only by the root of charity.
7.149	For many things may be done that have a good appearance, and yet do not proceed from the root of charity.
7.150	For thorns also have flowers: some actions truly seem rough, seem savage; yet they are done for discipline at the bidding of charity.
7.151	Once for all, then, a short precept is given you: Love, and do what you will: whether you hold your peace, hold your peace through love; whether you cry out, cry out through love; whether you correct, correct through love; whether you spare, spare through love: let the root of love be within; from this root nothing can spring but what is good.
7.152	9. “In this is love—in this the love of God toward us was made manifest, because God sent His only-begotten Son into this world, that we might live through Him.—In this is love, not that we loved God, but that He loved us”: we did not love Him first: for to this end He loved us, that we might love Him: “And sent His Son to be the Atoner for our sins”: “litatorem,” that is, one who sacrifices.
7.153	He sacrificed for our sins.
7.154	Where did He find the sacrifice?
7.155	Where did He find the victim which He would offer pure?
7.156	Other He found none; His own self He offered.
7.157	“Beloved, if God so loved us, we ought also to love one another.
7.158	Peter,” He says, “do you love me?”
7.159	And he said, “I love.”
7.160	“Feed my sheep.”
7.161	10. “No one has seen God at any time”: He is a thing invisible; not with the eye but with the heart must He be sought.
7.162	But just as, if we wished to see the sun, we would cleanse the eye of the body, so, wishing to see God, let us cleanse the eye by which God can be seen.
7.163	Where is this eye?
7.164	Hear the Gospel: “Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God.”
7.165	But let no one imagine God for himself according to the lust of his eyes.
7.166	For so he makes for himself either a huge form, or a certain incalculable magnitude which, like the light he sees with his bodily eyes, he makes extend in all directions; field after field of space he gives it all the bigness he can; or he represents it to himself as if it were an old man of venerable form.
7.167	Do not imagine any of these things.
7.168	There is something you may imagine, if you would see God: “God is love.”
7.169	What sort of face has love? What form has it? What stature? What feet? What hands has it? No one can say.
7.170	And yet it has feet, for these carry men to church; it has hands, for these reach out to the poor; it has eyes, for by them we consider the needy: “Blessed is the man,” it is said, “who considers the needy and the poor.”
7.171	It has ears, of which the Lord says, “He who has ears to hear, let him hear.”
7.172	These are not members distinct in place; but he who has charity sees the whole at once with the understanding.
7.173	Inhabit, and you shall be inhabited; dwell, and you shall be dwelt in.
7.174	For what do you say, my brethren? Who loves what he does not see?
7.175	Now why, when charity is praised, do you lift up your hands, shout acclaim, praise?
7.176	What have I shown you?
7.177	What I brought forth, was it a gleam of colors?
7.178	What I set before you, was it gold and silver?
7.179	Have I dug out jewels from hidden treasures?
7.180	What of this sort have I shown to your eyes?
7.181	Is my face changed while I speak?
7.182	I am in the flesh; I am in the same form in which I came out to you; you are in the same form in which you came here: charity is praised, and you shout applause.
7.183	Certainly you see nothing.
7.184	But as it pleases you when you praise, so let it please you to keep it in your heart.
7.185	For mark well what I say, brethren; I urge you all, as God enables me, toward a great treasure.
7.186	If a beautiful little vase were shown you, embossed, inlaid with gold, finely wrought, and it charmed your eyes, and drew toward it the eager desire of your heart, and you were pleased with the hand of the craftsman, and the weight of the silver, and the splendor of the metal, would not each one of you say, “O, if only I had that vase!”
7.187	And you would say it to no purpose, for it would not be in your power to have it.
7.188	Or if one should wish to have it, he might think of stealing it from another’s house.
7.189	Charity is praised to you; if it pleases you, have it, possess it: there is no need for you to rob anyone, no need for you to think of buying it; it is to be had freely, without cost.
7.190	Take it, embrace it; there is nothing sweeter.
7.191	If it is such when it is only spoken of, what must it be when one has it?
7.192	11. If any of you perhaps wish to keep charity, brethren, above all things do not imagine it to be an abject and sluggish thing; nor that charity is to be preserved by a sort of gentleness—no, not gentleness, but tameness and listlessness.
7.193	It is not preserved in that way.
7.194	Do not imagine that you love your servant when you do not beat him, or that you love your son when you do not give him discipline, or that you love your neighbor when you do not rebuke him: this is not charity, but mere feebleness.
7.195	Let charity be fervent to correct, to amend: but if the conduct is good, let it delight you; if bad, let it be amended, let it be corrected.
7.196	Do not love the error in the man, but the man: for God made the man; the man himself made the error.
7.197	Love that which God made; do not love that which the man himself made.
7.198	When you love that, you take away this; when you value that, you amend this.
7.199	But even if you are severe at any time, let it be because of love, for correction.
7.200	For this reason charity was signified by the Dove which descended upon the Lord.
7.201	That likeness of a dove, the likeness in which the Holy Spirit came, by whom charity was to be poured into us: why was this?
7.202	The dove has no gall: yet with beak and wings she fights for her young; hers is a fierceness without bitterness.
7.203	And so also does a father; when he chastises his son, he chastises him for discipline.
7.204	As I said, the kidnapper, in order that he may sell, lures the child with bitter endearments; a father, in order that he may correct, chastises without gall.
7.205	Be such toward all men.
7.206	See here, brethren, a great lesson, a great rule: each one of you has children, or wishes to have them; or if he has altogether determined to have no children after the flesh, at least he desires to have children spiritually:—what father does not correct his son? What son does his father not discipline?
7.207	And yet he seems to be fierce with him.
7.208	It is the fierceness of love, the fierceness of charity: a sort of fierceness without gall, after the manner of the dove, not of the raven.
7.209	Hence it came into my mind, my brethren, to tell you that those violators of charity are the ones who have made the schism: as they hate charity itself, so they also hate the dove.
7.210	But the dove convicts them: it comes forth from heaven, the heavens open, and it remains on the head of the Lord.
7.211	Why this? That John may hear, “This is He who baptizes.”
7.212	Away, you robbers; away, you invaders of the possession of Christ!
7.213	On your own possessions, where you insist on being lords, you have dared to fix the titles of the great Owner.
7.214	He recognizes His own titles; He claims for Himself His own possession.
7.215	He does not cancel the titles, but enters in and takes possession.
7.216	So in one who comes to the Catholic Church, his baptism is not canceled, so that the title of the commander may not be canceled: but what is done in the Catholic Church?
7.217	The title is acknowledged; the Owner enters in under His own titles, where the robber was entering in under titles not his own.
T:8	Homily VIII (1 John 4:12–16)
8.1	“If we love one another, God abides in us, and His love will be perfected in us.
8.2	By this we know that we abide in Him, and He in us, because He has given us of His Spirit.
8.3	And we have seen and are witnesses that the Father sent the Son to be the Savior of the world.
8.4	Whoever confesses that Jesus is the Son of God, God abides in him, and he in God.
8.5	And we have known and believed the love that God has for us.
8.6	God is love; and he who abides in love abides in God, and God abides in him.”
8.7	1. Love is a sweet word, but sweeter the deed.
8.8	To be always speaking of it is not in our power: for we have many things to do, and various affairs draw us different ways, so that our tongue does not have leisure to be always speaking of love: though indeed our tongue could have nothing better to do.
8.9	But though we may not always be speaking of it, we may always keep it.
8.10	Just as it is with the Alleluia which we sing at this present time: are we always doing this?
8.11	Not for one hour—I do not say for the whole length of it—do we sing Alleluia, but barely for a few moments of one hour, and then we give ourselves to something else.
8.12	Now Alleluia, as you already know, means, Praise the Lord.
8.13	He who praises God with his tongue cannot be always doing this; he who praises God by his life and conduct can be doing it always.
8.14	Works of mercy, affections of charity, sanctity of piety, purity of chastity, modesty of sobriety—these things are always to be practiced: whether we are in public or at home; whether before men or in our room; whether speaking or keeping silent; whether occupied with something or free from occupation: these are always to be kept, because all these virtues which I have named are within.
8.15	But who is able to name them all?
8.16	There is, as it were, the army of an emperor stationed within, in your mind.
8.17	For as an emperor does what he will by his army, so the Lord Jesus Christ, once He begins to dwell in our inner man (that is, in the mind through faith), uses these virtues as His ministers.
8.18	And by these virtues, which cannot be seen with the eyes and yet are praised when they are named—and they would not be praised unless they were loved, nor loved unless they were seen; and if not loved unless seen, they are seen with another eye, that is, with the inward beholding of the heart—by these invisible virtues the members are visibly set in motion: the feet to walk, but where? Where they are moved by the good will which serves the good emperor like a soldier: the hands to work; but at what? At that which is commanded by charity, which is inspired within by the Holy Spirit.
8.19	The members, then, are seen when they are set in motion; He who orders them within is not seen: and who He is that orders them within is known almost only to Him who orders, and to him who is ordered within.
8.20	2. For, brethren, you heard just now when the Gospel was read, at least if you had for it the ear not only of the body but also of the heart.
8.21	What did it say? “Take heed that you do not do your righteousness before men, to be seen by them.”
8.22	Did He mean to say this, that whatever good things we do, we should hide them from the eyes of men, and be afraid to be seen?
8.23	If you fear spectators, you will not have imitators: you ought therefore to be seen.
8.24	But you must not do it for the purpose of being seen.
8.25	Not there should be the end of your joy, not there the goal of your rejoicing, that you should count yourself to have gained the whole fruit of your good work when you are seen and praised.
8.26	This is nothing. Despise yourself when you are praised; let Him be praised in you who works through you.
8.27	Therefore do not do the good you do for your own praise, but to the praise of Him from whom you have the power to do good.
8.28	From yourself you have the doing of ill; from God you have the doing of good.
8.29	On the other hand, look at perverse men, how backward they are.
8.30	What they do well, they insist on ascribing to themselves; if they do ill, they insist on accusing God.
8.31	Reverse this distorted and backward procedure, which puts the thing, as one might say, head downwards, which makes that lowermost which is uppermost, and that upward which is downward.
8.32	Do you want to make God lowermost and yourself uppermost?
8.33	You fall headlong; you do not elevate yourself; for He is always above.
8.34	What then? You well, and God ill? No, rather say this, if you would speak more truly: I ill, He well; and what I do well, the well-doing is from Him: for whatever I do from myself is ill.
8.35	This confession strengthens the heart and makes a firm foundation of love.
8.36	For if we ought to hide our good works lest they be seen by men, what becomes of that saying of the Lord in the sermon which He delivered on the mount?
8.37	Where He said this, there He also said a little before, “Let your good works shine before men.”
8.38	And He did not stop there, did not make an end there, but added, “And glorify your Father who is in heaven.”
8.39	And what does the apostle say?
8.40	“And I was unknown by face to the churches of Judea which were in Christ: but they only heard, He who persecuted us in times past now preaches the faith which he once destroyed.
8.41	And they glorified God in me.”
8.42	See how he also, since he had become so widely known, did not place the good in his own praise, but in the praise of God.
8.43	And as for himself, in his own person, that he was one who laid waste the Church, a persecutor, envious, malicious—it is he himself who confesses this, not we who reproach him with it.
8.44	Paul loves to have his sins spoken of by us, that He may be glorified who healed such a disease.
8.45	For it was the hand of the Physician that cut and healed the greatness of the sore.
8.46	That voice from heaven laid low the persecutor and raised up the preacher; killed Saul and brought Paul to life.
8.47	For Saul was the persecutor of a holy man; from him this man had his name when he persecuted the Christians: afterward, from Saul he became Paul.
8.48	What does the name Paulus mean?
8.49	Little. Therefore when he was Saul, he was proud, lifted up; when he was Paul, he was lowly, little.
8.50	So we say, I will see you “paulo post,” that is, after a little while.
8.51	Hear that he was made little: “For I am the least of the apostles”; and, “To me, the least of all saints,” he says in another place.
8.52	So he was among the apostles as the hem of the garment: but the Church of the Gentiles touched it, as did the woman who had the flow of blood, and was made whole.
8.53	3. So then, brethren, this I would say, this I do say, this, if I could, I would not leave unsaid: Let there be in you now these works, now those, according to the time, according to the hours, according to the days.
8.54	Are you always to be speaking? Always to keep silence? Always to be refreshing the body? Always to be fasting? Always to be giving bread to the needy? Always to be clothing the naked? Always to be visiting the sick? Always to be bringing into agreement those who disagree? Always to be burying the dead?
8.55	No: but now this, now that.
8.56	These things are taken in hand, and they stop: but that which, as emperor, commands all the forces within neither has a beginning nor ought to stop.
8.57	Let charity within have no intermission: let the duties of charity be carried out according to the time.
8.58	Let “brotherly love,” then, as it is written, let “brotherly love continue.”
8.59	4. But perhaps it will have struck some of you all along, while we have been expounding this epistle of blessed John to you, why it is only “brotherly” love that he so emphatically commends.
8.60	“He who loves his brother,” he says; and, “a commandment is given us that we love one another.”
8.61	Again and again it is brotherly love that he speaks of: but the love of God, that is, the love with which we ought to love God, he has not so constantly named; yet he has not altogether left it unspoken.
8.62	But concerning love of an enemy, almost throughout the epistle, he has said nothing.
8.63	Although he vehemently preaches and commends charity to us, he does not tell us to love our enemies, but tells us to love our brethren.
8.64	But just now, when the Gospel was read, we heard, “For if you love those who love you, what reward shall you have?
8.65	Do not even the tax collectors do this?”
8.66	How is it then that John the apostle commends brotherly love as the thing of great concern to us for a certain perfection; whereas the Lord says it is not enough that we love our brethren, but that we ought to extend that love so that we may reach even to enemies?
8.67	He who reaches even to enemies does not pass over the brethren.
8.68	It must, like fire, first seize upon what is nearest, and so extend to what is further off.
8.69	A brother is nearer to you than any chance person.
8.70	Again, that person whom you do not know, who yet is not against you, has more hold upon you than an enemy who is also against you.
8.71	Extend your love to those who are nearest, yet do not call this extending: for it is almost loving yourself, to love those who are close to you.
8.72	Extend it to the unknown, who have done you no harm.
8.73	Pass even them: reach on to love your enemies.
8.74	This at least the Lord commands.
8.75	Why has the apostle here said nothing about loving an enemy?
8.76	5. All love—whether that which is called carnal, which is usually called not “dilectio” but “amor” (for the word “dilectio” is usually used of better objects, and understood of better objects)—yet all love, dear brethren, has in it a wishing well to those who are loved.
8.77	For we ought not so to love, nor are we able so to love (whether “diligere” or “amare”: for this latter word the Lord used when He said, “Petra, amas me?”
8.78	“Peter, do you love me?”)—we ought not so to love men as we hear gluttons say, I love thrushes.
8.79	You ask why he loves them?
8.80	That he may kill them, that he may consume them.
8.81	He says he loves them, and to this end he loves them, that they may cease to be; to this end he loves them, that he may do away with them.
8.82	And whatever we love by way of food, we love it to this end, that it may be consumed and we restored.
8.83	Are men to be loved in such a way as to be consumed?
8.84	But there is a certain friendliness of well-wishing, by which we desire at some time or other to do good to those whom we love.
8.85	What if there is no good that we can do?
8.86	The benevolence, the wishing well, of itself suffices for him who loves.
8.87	For we ought not to wish men to be wretched, that we may be able to practice works of mercy.
8.88	You give bread to the hungry: but it would be better that none hungered, and you had no one to give to.
8.89	You clothe the naked: oh, that all were clothed, and this need did not exist!
8.90	You bury the dead: oh, that it had come at last, that life where none shall die!
8.91	You reconcile those who quarrel: oh, that it were here at last, that eternal peace of Jerusalem, where none shall disagree!
8.92	For all these are services rendered to necessities.
8.93	Take away the wretched; there will be an end to works of mercy.
8.94	The works of mercy will be at an end: shall the ardor of charity be quenched?
8.95	With a truer touch of love you love the happy man, for whom there is no good service you can do; purer will that love be, and far more unalloyed.
8.96	For if you have done a kindness to the wretched, perhaps you desire to lift yourself up over against him, and wish him to be subject to you, who have done the kindness to him.
8.97	He was in need, you bestowed; you seem to yourself greater, because you bestowed, than he on whom it was bestowed.
8.98	Wish him your equal, that you both may be under the One Lord, on whom nothing can be bestowed.
8.99	6. For in this the proud soul has passed its bounds and, in a manner, become avaricious.
8.100	For, “The root of all evils is avarice”; and again it is said, “The beginning of all sin is pride.”
8.101	And we ask, it may be, how these two sayings agree: “The root of all evils is avarice,” and, “The beginning of all sin is pride.”
8.102	If pride is the beginning of all sin, then pride is the root of all evils.
8.103	Now certainly, “the root of all evils is avarice.”
8.104	We find that in pride there is also avarice (or grasping); for man has passed his bounds: and what is it to be avaricious? To go beyond that which suffices.
8.105	Adam fell by pride: “the beginning of all sin is pride,” it says: did he fall by grasping?
8.106	What more grasping than he for whom God could not suffice?
8.107	In fact, my brethren, we read how man was made after the image and likeness of God: and what did God say of him?
8.108	“And let him have power over the fish of the sea, and over the birds of the heaven, and over all cattle that move upon the earth.”
8.109	Did He say, Have power over men?
8.110	“Have power,” He says: He has given him natural power: “have power” over what? “Over the fish of the sea, the birds of the heaven, and all moving things that move upon the earth.”
8.111	Why is this power over these things a natural power?
8.112	Because man has the power from this: that he was made after the image of God.
8.113	And in what was he made after God’s image?
8.114	In the intellect, in the mind, in the inner man; in that he understands truth, distinguishes between right and wrong, knows by whom he was made, is able to understand his Creator, to praise his Creator: he has this intelligence who has prudence.
8.115	Therefore, when many by evil lusts wore out the image of God in themselves, and by the perversity of their conduct extinguished the very flame, so to speak, of intelligence, the Scripture cried aloud to them, “Do not become like the horse and mule, which have no understanding.”
8.116	That is to say, I have set you above the horse and mule; you I made after my image; I have given you power over these.
8.117	Why? Because they do not have the rational mind: but you, by the rational mind, are capable of truth, and understand what is above you: be subject to Him who is above you, and beneath you shall be those things over which you were set.
8.118	But because by sin man deserted Him whom he ought to be under, he is made subject to the things which he ought to be above.
8.119	7. Mark what I say: God, man, beasts: that is, above you, God; beneath you, the beasts.
8.120	Acknowledge Him who is above you, that those who are beneath you may acknowledge you.
8.121	Thus, because Daniel acknowledged God above him, the lions acknowledged him above them.
8.122	But if you do not acknowledge Him who is above you, you despise your superior, you become subject to your inferior.
8.123	Accordingly, how was the pride of the Egyptians subdued?
8.124	By means of frogs and flies.
8.125	God might have sent lions: but a great man may be scared by a lion.
8.126	The prouder they were, the more by means of things contemptible and feeble was their wicked neck broken.
8.127	But Daniel the lions acknowledge, because he was subject to God.
8.128	What then of the martyrs who were cast to the wild beasts to fight with them, and were torn by the teeth of savage creatures—were they not under God? Or were those three men servants of God, and the Maccabees not servants of God?
8.129	The fire acknowledged as God’s servants the three men, whom it did not burn, nor did it hurt their garments; and did it not acknowledge the Maccabees?
8.130	It acknowledged the Maccabees; it did, my brethren, acknowledge them also.
8.131	But there was need of a scourge, by the Lord’s permission: He has said in Scripture, “He scourges every son whom He receives.”
8.132	For do you think, my brethren, that the iron would have pierced into the vitals of the Lord unless He had permitted it, or that He would have hung fastened to the tree unless it had been His will?
8.133	Did not His own creature acknowledge Him?
8.134	Or did He set an example of patience for His faithful ones?
8.135	You see, then, God delivered some visibly, some He did not deliver visibly: yet all He delivered spiritually; spiritually He deserted none.
8.136	Visibly He seemed to have deserted some; some He seemed to have rescued.
8.137	He rescued some for this reason, that you may not think He did not have the power to rescue.
8.138	He has given proof that He has the power, so that where He does not do it, you may understand a more hidden will, not surmise a difficulty in doing it.
8.139	But what, brethren? When we shall have come out of all these snares of mortality, when the times of temptation shall have passed away, when the river of this world shall have flowed by, and we shall have received again that “first robe,” that immortality which we lost by sinning—“when this corruptible shall have put on incorruption,” that is, this flesh shall have put on incorruption, “and this mortal shall have put on immortality”—all creatures shall acknowledge the now perfected sons of God, in whom there is no more need to be tempted or to be scourged: all things shall be subjected to us, if here we are subjected to God.
8.140	8. So then the Christian ought to be such that he does not glory over other “men.”
8.141	For God has given it to you to be over the beasts, that is, to be better than the beasts.
8.142	This you have by nature; you will always be better than a beast.
8.143	If you wish to be better than another man, you will begrudge him when you see him to be your equal.
8.144	You ought to wish all men to be your equals; and if by wisdom you surpass anyone, you ought to wish that he also may be wise.
8.145	As long as he is slow, he learns from you; as long as he is untaught, he has need of you; and you are seen to be the teacher, he the learner; therefore you seem to be the superior, because you are the teacher; he the inferior, because he is the learner.
8.146	Unless you wish him to be your equal, you wish to have him always a learner.
8.147	But if you wish to have him always a learner, you will be an envious teacher.
8.148	If an envious teacher, how will you be a teacher?
8.149	I beg you, do not teach him your envy.
8.150	Hear the apostle speaking from the deep affections of charity: “I would that all were even as I.” In what sense did he wish all to be his equals?
8.151	In this he was superior to all, that by charity he wished all to be his equals.
8.152	I say, then, man has passed his bounds; he would insist on being greedy for more than his due, on being above men, he who was made above the beasts: and this is pride.
