0.168	How greatly, therefore, does it now become us to consider that time when we must meet one another before the chief Shepherd!
0.169	When I must give an account of my stewardship, of the service I have done for, and the reception and treatment I have had among, the people he sent me to; and you must give an account of your own conduct toward me, and of the use you have made of these twenty-three years of my ministry.
0.170	For then both you and I must appear together, and we both must give an account, so that an infallible, righteous and eternal sentence may be passed upon us by him who will judge us with respect to all that we have said or done in our meetings here, all our conduct toward one another, in the house of God and elsewhere, on Sabbath days and on other days; who will try our hearts and reveal our thoughts, and the principles and dispositions of our minds; who will judge us with respect to all the controversies that have existed between us, with the strictest impartiality, and will examine our treatment of each other in those controversies.
0.171	There is nothing covered that shall not be revealed, nor hidden that shall not be known; all will be examined in the searching, penetrating light of God’s omniscience and glory, and by him whose eyes are like a flame of fire; and truth and right shall be made to appear plainly, stripped of every veil; and all error, falsehood, unrighteousness and injury shall be laid open, stripped of every disguise; every plausible pretense, every quibble and all false reasoning shall vanish in a moment, as being unable to bear the light of that day.
0.172	And then our hearts will be turned inside out, and their secrets will be made to appear more plainly than our outward actions do now.
0.173	Then it shall appear what ends we have aimed at, what governing principles we have acted from, and what dispositions we have exercised in our church disputes and contests.
0.174	Then it will appear whether I acted uprightly, and from a truly conscientious, careful regard for my duty to my great Lord and Master, in some earlier church controversies, which have been attended with exceedingly unhappy circumstances and consequences; it will appear whether there was any just cause for the resentment that was shown on those occasions.
0.175	And then our recent great controversy, concerning the qualifications necessary for admission to the privileges of members in full standing in the visible church of Christ, will be examined and judged in all its parts and circumstances, and the whole will be set forth in a clear, certain and perfect light.
0.176	Then it will appear whether the doctrine that I have preached and published concerning this matter is Christ’s own doctrine; whether he will not own it as one of the precious truths that have proceeded from his own mouth, and vindicate and honor it as such before the whole universe.
0.177	Then it will appear what is meant by “the man who comes without the wedding garment”; for that is the day spoken of in Matthew 22,
0.178	verse 13, in which such a one shall be bound hand and foot and cast into outer darkness, where there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.
0.179	And then it will appear whether, in declaring this doctrine, and in acting in agreement with it, and in my general conduct in the affair, I have been influenced by any regard for my own worldly interest or honor, or by a desire to appear wiser than others; or have acted from any sinister, worldly motives whatsoever; and whether what I have done has not been from a careful, strict and tender regard for the will of my Lord and Master, and because I dared not offend him, being satisfied what his will was, after a long, diligent, impartial and prayerful inquiry; having this constantly in view and prospect, to make me greatly concerned not to decide rashly that the truth lies on this side of the question, where I am now persuaded it does: that such a decision would not be for my worldly interest, but every way against it, bringing a long series of extreme difficulties and plunging me into an abyss of trouble and sorrow.
0.180	And then it will appear whether my people have done their duty to their pastor with respect to this matter; whether they have shown a right temper and spirit on this occasion; whether they have done me justice in hearing, attending to and considering what I had to say in evidence of what I believed and taught as part of the counsel of God; whether I have been treated with the impartiality, fairness and regard that the just Judge considered due; and whether, in the many steps that have been taken and the many things that have been said and done in the course of this controversy, righteousness and love and Christian decorum have been maintained; or, if otherwise, to how great a degree these things have been violated.
0.181	Then every step of the conduct of each of us in this affair, from first to last, and the spirit we have shown in it all, shall be examined and made manifest; and our own consciences shall speak plainly and loudly, and each of us shall be convinced, and the world shall know; and never again shall there be any mistake, misrepresentation or misunderstanding of the affair, to all eternity.
0.182	This controversy has now probably been brought to a conclusion between you and me as far as this world is concerned; it was concluded by the event of the week before last. But it must have another decision on that great day, which will certainly come, when you and I shall meet together before the great judgment seat; and therefore I leave it to that time, and shall say no more about it at present.
0.183	But I would now proceed to address myself particularly to several kinds of persons.
0.184	I. To those among us who profess godliness.
0.185	I would now call you to a serious consideration of that great day in which you must meet him who has until now been your pastor, before the Judge whose eyes are like a flame of fire.
0.186	I have endeavored, to the best of my ability, to search the word of God with regard to the distinguishing marks of true piety, those by which persons might best discover their state, and most surely and clearly judge themselves.
0.187	And I have applied these rules and marks to you from time to time in the preaching of the word, to the utmost of my skill, and in the plainest and most searching manner that I have been able, in order to detect the deceived hypocrite and to establish the hopes and comforts of the sincere.
0.188	And yet it is to be feared that, after all I have done, I now leave some of you in a deceived, deluded state; for it is not to be supposed that among several hundred professing Christians, none are deceived.
0.189	From now on I am likely to have no more opportunity to take the care and charge of your souls, to examine and search them.
0.190	But still I urge you to remember and consider the rules that I have often laid down for you during my ministry, with a solemn regard for the future day when you and I must meet together before our Judge; when the applications calling you to self-examination that you have heard from me must be rehearsed again before you, and those rules of trial must themselves be tried, and it will appear whether they have been good or not; and it will also appear whether you have heard them impartially and tested yourselves by them; and the Judge himself, who is infallible, will try both you and me; and after this no one will be deceived concerning the state of their souls.
0.191	I have often reminded you that, whatever your claims to experiences, discoveries, comforts and joys have been, on that day everyone will be judged according to his works; and then you will find it so.
0.192	May you have a minister of greater knowledge of the word of God and better acquaintance with the cases of souls, and of greater skill in applying himself to souls, whose sermons may be more searching and convincing; so that those of you who have held fast to deceit under my preaching may have your eyes opened by his; that you may be undeceived before that great day.
0.193	What means and helps for instruction and self-examination you may have hereafter is uncertain; but one thing is certain: the time is short, and your opportunity for correcting mistakes in so important a concern will soon come to an end.
0.194	We live in a world of great changes.
0.195	A great change has now come to pass; you have withdrawn yourselves from my ministry, under which you have continued for so many years. But the time is coming, and will soon come, when you will pass out of time into eternity; and so you will pass from under all means of grace whatsoever.
0.196	The greater part of you who profess godliness have (to use the phrase of the apostle) “acknowledged me in part”: you have until now acknowledged me to be your spiritual father, the instrument of the greatest good to you that ever is or can be obtained by any of the children of men.
0.197	Consider that day when you and I shall meet before our Judge, when it shall be examined whether you have received from me the treatment that is due to spiritual children, and whether you have treated me as you ought to have treated a spiritual father.
0.198	As the relation of a natural parent brings great obligations on children in the sight of God, so much more, in many respects, does the relation of a spiritual father bring great obligations on those whose conversion and eternal salvation they suppose God has made him the instrument of: 1 Corinthians 4,
0.199	verse 15: “For though you have ten thousand instructors in Christ, yet you have not many fathers; for in Christ Jesus I have begotten you through the gospel.”
0.200	II. Now that I am taking my leave of this people, I would apply myself to those among them whom I leave in a Christless, graceless condition; and I would call on such to consider seriously that solemn day when they and I must meet before the Judge of the world.
0.201	My parting with you is in some respects a peculiarly sorrowful parting, inasmuch as I leave you in most sorrowful circumstances; because I leave you in the gall of bitterness and the bond of iniquity, with the wrath of God abiding on you, and remaining under condemnation to everlasting misery and destruction.
0.202	Since I must leave you, it would have been a comforting and happy circumstance of our parting if I had left you in Christ, safe and blessed in that sure refuge and glorious rest of the saints.
0.203	But it is otherwise.
0.204	I leave you far off, aliens and strangers, wretched subjects and captives of sin and Satan, and prisoners of avenging justice; without Christ and without God in the world.
0.205	Your consciences bear me witness that while I had opportunity, I have not ceased to warn you and to set your danger before you.
0.206	I have studied to represent the misery and necessity of your circumstances in the clearest manner possible.
0.207	I have tried every way I could think of that tended to awaken your consciences, and to make you aware of the necessity of making good use of your time, and of being quick to flee from the wrath to come, and thorough in the use of means for your escape and safety.
0.208	I have diligently endeavored to find out and use the most powerful motives to persuade you to take care for your own welfare and salvation.
0.209	I have not only endeavored to awaken you, that you might be moved with fear, but I have used my utmost endeavors to win you: I have sought out acceptable words, that if possible I might prevail upon you to forsake sin, and turn to God, and accept Christ as your Savior and Lord.
0.210	I have spent my strength very much in these things.
0.211	But yet, with regard to you to whom I am now speaking, I have not been successful; but I have reason this day to complain in those words of Jeremiah 6,
0.212	verse 29: “The bellows are burned, the lead is consumed by the fire; the refiner melts in vain; for the wicked are not plucked away.” It is to be feared that all my labors, as to many of you, have served no other purpose but to harden you; and that the word I have preached, instead of being a savor of life to life, has been a savor of death to death.
0.213	Though I shall not have any account to give in the future for those who have openly and resolutely renounced my ministry, as of a trust committed to me, yet remember that you must give account for yourselves of your care of your own souls, and of your use of all means, past and future, through your whole lives.
0.214	God alone knows what will become of your poor, perishing souls, what means you may enjoy hereafter, or what disadvantages and temptations you may be under.
0.215	May God in his mercy grant that, however unsuccessful all past means have been, you may have future means that may have a new effect; and that the word of God, as it shall hereafter be dispensed to you, may prove like the fire and the hammer that breaks the rock in pieces.
0.216	However, let me now at parting exhort and beseech you not to forget entirely the warnings you have had while under my ministry.
0.217	When you and I meet at the day of judgment, then you will remember them: the sight of me, your former minister, on that occasion will soon revive them in your memory, and that in a very affecting manner.
0.218	O do not let that be the first time that they are revived in this way.
0.219	You and I are now parting from one another as far as this world is concerned; let us labor that we may not be parted after our meeting at the last day.
0.220	If I have been your faithful pastor (which will appear on that day, whether I have or not), then I shall be acquitted, and shall ascend with Christ.
0.221	O do your part, so that in such a case it may not be that you should be forced to part eternally from me and from all who have been faithful in Christ Jesus.
0.222	This is a sorrowful parting that now takes place between you and me, but that would be a more sorrowful parting to you than this.
0.223	This one you may perhaps bear without being much affected by it, if you are not glad of it; but such a parting on that day will affect you most deeply, keenly and dreadfully.
0.224	III. I would address myself to those who are under some awakenings.
0.225	Blessed be God that there are some such, and that (although I have reason to fear I leave multitudes in this large congregation in a Christless state) yet I do not leave them all in total insensibility and carelessness about their souls.
0.226	Some of you who I have reason to hope are under some awakenings have made me acquainted with your circumstances; which tends to make me, now that I am leaving you, take my leave of you with a special concern for you.
0.227	What will be the outcome of your present exercise of mind I do not know; but it will be known on that day when you and I shall meet before the judgment seat of Christ.
0.228	Therefore now give much consideration to that day.
0.229	Now that I am parting with this flock, I would once more press upon you the counsels I have given before: to take heed of being superficial in so great a concern, to be thorough and in good earnest in the matter, and to beware of backsliding, to hold on and hold out to the end.
0.230	And cry mightily to God that these great changes which are passing over this church and congregation do not prove to be your overthrow.
0.231	There is great temptation in them; and the devil will undoubtedly seek to take advantage of them, if possible to make your present convictions and endeavors come to nothing.
0.232	You need to double your diligence, and watch and pray, lest you be overcome by temptation.
0.233	Whoever may hereafter stand in relation to you as your spiritual guide, my desire and prayer is that the great Shepherd of the sheep would have a special regard for you and be your guide (for there is none who teaches like him), and that he who is the infinite fountain of light would “open your eyes, and turn you from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to God; that you may receive forgiveness of sins, and inheritance among those who are sanctified, through faith that is in Christ”; so that on that great day, when I shall meet you again before your Judge and mine, we may meet in joyful and glorious circumstances, never to be separated any more.
0.234	IV. I would apply myself to the young people of the congregation.
0.235	Since I have been settled in the work of the ministry in this place, I have always had a special concern for the souls of the young people, and a desire that religion might flourish among them; and I have especially exerted myself to that end, because I knew the special opportunity they had beyond others, and that ordinarily those for whom God intended mercy were brought to fear and love him in their youth.
0.236	And it has always seemed to me a peculiarly lovely thing to see young people walking in the ways of virtue and Christian piety, having their hearts purified and sweetened with a principle of divine love.
0.237	And it has seemed an exceedingly beautiful thing, and one that would greatly adorn the town and add to its happiness, if the young people could be persuaded, when they meet together, to converse as Christians and as the children of God; avoiding impurity, frivolity and excess; keeping strictly to the rules of virtue, and talking together of the things of God and Christ and heaven.
0.238	This is what I have longed for; and it has been exceedingly grievous to me when I have heard of vice, vanity and disorder among our youth.
0.239	And so far as I know my own heart, it was from this that I formerly led this church to some measures for the suppression of vice among our young people, which gave such great offense, and by which I became so disliked.
0.240	I have sought the good, and not the harm, of our young people.
0.241	I have desired their truest honor and happiness, and not their disgrace; knowing that true virtue and religion tended not only to the glory and happiness of young people in another world, but to their greatest peace and prosperity, and highest dignity and honor, in this world; and above all things to sweeten and make pleasant and delightful even the days of youth.
0.242	But whether I have loved you and sought your good more or less, yet since God in his providence is now calling me to part with you, and I am committing your souls to him who once committed their pastoral care to me, nothing remains but only (as I am now taking my leave of you) earnestly to beseech you, out of love for yourselves if you have none for me, not to despise and forget the warnings and counsels I have so often given you; remembering the day when you and I must meet again before the great Judge of the living and the dead; when it will appear whether the things I have taught you were true, whether the counsels I have given you were good, and whether I truly sought your good, and whether you have made good use of my endeavors.
0.243	I have from time to time earnestly warned you against frolicking (as it is called), and against some other liberties commonly taken by young people in the land.
0.244	And whatever some may say in justification of such liberties and customs, and however they may laugh at warnings against them, I now leave you my parting testimony against such things, not doubting that God will approve and confirm it on that day when we shall meet before him.
0.245	V. I would apply myself to the children of the congregation, the lambs of this flock, who have been so long under my care.
0.246	I have just now said that I have had a special concern for the young people; and in saying so I did not intend to exclude you.
0.247	You are in youth, and in the earliest youth; and therefore I have been aware that if those who were young had a precious opportunity for their souls’ good, you who are very young had, in many respects, an especially precious opportunity.
0.248	And accordingly I have not neglected you: I have endeavored to do the part of a faithful shepherd in feeding the lambs as well as the sheep.
0.249	Christ once committed the care of your souls to me as your minister; and you know, dear children, how I have instructed you and warned you from time to time; you know how I have often called you together for that purpose; and some of you have at times seemed to be affected by what I have said to you.
0.250	But I am afraid it has had no saving effect on many of you, but that you still remain in an unconverted condition, without any real saving work wrought in your souls, convincing you thoroughly of your sin and misery, causing you to see the great evil of sin, and to mourn for it and hate it above all things, and giving you a sense of the excellence of the Lord Jesus Christ, bringing you with all your hearts to cling to him as your Savior, weaning your hearts from the world, and causing you to love God above all, and to delight in holiness more than in all the pleasant things of this earth; and so I now leave you in a miserable condition, having no interest in Christ, and so under the awful displeasure and anger of God, and in danger of going down to the pit of eternal misery.
0.251	But now I must bid you farewell: I must leave you in the hands of God; I can do no more for you than pray for you.
0.252	Only I ask you not to forget, but often to think of the counsels and warnings I have given you, and the endeavors I have made, that your souls might be saved from everlasting destruction.
0.253	Dear children, I leave you in an evil world that is full of snares and temptations.
0.254	God alone knows what will become of you.
0.255	This the Scripture has told us, that there are but few saved; and we have abundant confirmation of it from what we see.
0.256	This we see: that children die as well as others; multitudes die before they grow up; and of those who grow up, comparatively few ever give good evidence of saving conversion to God.
0.257	I pray God to pity you, and take care of you, and provide for you the best means for the good of your souls; and that God himself would undertake for you, to be your heavenly Father and the mighty Redeemer of your immortal souls.
0.258	Do not neglect to pray for yourselves: take heed that you are not among the number of those who cast off fear and restrain prayer before God.
0.259	Pray to God constantly in secret; and often remember that great day when you must appear before the judgment seat of Christ, and meet your minister there, who has so often counseled and warned you.
0.260	I conclude with a few words of advice to all in general, on some particulars that are of great importance for the welfare and prosperity of this church and congregation.
0.261	1. One thing that greatly concerns you, if you would be a happy people, is the maintaining of family order.
0.262	We have had great disputes about how the church ought to be regulated; and indeed the subject of these disputes was of great importance; but the proper regulation of your families is of no less, and in some respects of much greater, importance.
0.263	Every Christian family ought to be, as it were, a little church, consecrated to Christ, and wholly influenced and governed by his rules.
0.264	And family education and order are some of the chief means of grace.
0.265	If these fail, all other means are likely to prove ineffectual.
0.266	If these are duly maintained, all the means of grace will be likely to prosper and be successful.
0.267	Let me now, therefore, once more, before I finally cease to speak to this congregation, repeat and earnestly press the counsel I have often urged on heads of families here while I was their pastor: to take great pains in teaching, warning and directing their children; bringing them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord; beginning early, where there is still opportunity, and maintaining a constant diligence in labors of this kind; remembering that, if you would not have all your instructions and counsels prove ineffectual, there must be government as well as instruction, which must be maintained with an even hand and steady resolution, as a guard to the religion and morals of the family and the support of its good order.
0.268	Take heed that it is not with any of you as it was with Eli of old, who rebuked his children but did not restrain them; and that by this means you do not bring a similar curse on your families as he did on his.
0.269	And let children obey their parents, and yield to their instructions, and submit to their orders, if they would inherit a blessing and not a curse.
0.270	For we have reason to think, from many things in the word of God, that nothing tends more to bring a curse on persons in this world, and on all their worldly concerns, than undutiful, unsubmissive, disorderly behavior in children toward their parents.
0.271	2. If you would seek the future prosperity of this society, it is of vast importance that you avoid contention.
0.272	A contentious people will be a miserable people.
0.273	The contentions that have been among you since I first became your pastor have been one of the greatest burdens I have labored under in the course of my ministry: not only the contentions you have had with me, but those you have had with one another about your lands and other concerns; because I knew that contention, heat of spirit, evil speaking and things of a similar nature were directly contrary to the spirit of Christianity, and in a peculiar manner tended to drive God’s Spirit away from a people and to render all means of grace ineffectual, as well as to destroy a people’s outward comfort and welfare.
0.274	Let me therefore earnestly exhort you, as you would seek your own future good, to watch against a contentious spirit.
0.275	If you would see good days, seek peace and pursue it, 1 Peter 3,
0.276	verses 10, 11. Let the contention that has lately arisen about the terms of Christian communion, as it has been the greatest of your contentions, also be the last of them.
0.277	I would, now that I am preaching my farewell sermon, say to you, as the apostle said to the Corinthians, 2 Corinthians 13,
0.278	verses 11, 12: “Finally, brothers, farewell.
0.279	Be perfect, be of one mind, live in peace; and the God of love and peace shall be with you.”
0.280	And here I would particularly advise those who have stood by me in the recent controversy to watch over their spirits and avoid all bitterness toward others.
0.281	Your temptations are in some respects the greatest, because what has recently been done is grievous to you.
0.282	But however wrongly you may think others have acted, maintain with great diligence and watchfulness a Christian meekness and calmness of spirit; and labor in this respect to excel others who are of the opposing side.
0.283	And this will be the best victory: for “he who rules his spirit is better than he who takes a city.”
0.284	Therefore let nothing be done through strife or vainglory.
0.285	Indulge no revengeful spirit in any way, but watch and pray against it; and by all means in your power seek the prosperity of the town; and never think that you behave as becomes Christians except when you sincerely, feelingly and fervently love all men, of whatever party or opinion, and whether friendly or unkind, just or injurious, to you or your friends, or to the cause and kingdom of Christ.
0.286	3. Another thing that vastly concerns the future prosperity of this town is that you should watch against the encroachments of error, and particularly Arminianism and doctrines of a similar tendency.
0.287	Many of you, as I well remember, were much alarmed at the apprehension of the danger of these corrupt principles prevailing, nearly sixteen years ago.
0.288	But the danger then was small in comparison with what appears now.
0.289	These doctrines are at this day much more prevalent than they were then: the progress they have made in the land within these seven years seems to have been vastly greater than at any time in a similar span before; and they are still prevailing and creeping into almost all parts of the land, threatening the utter ruin of the credit of those doctrines that are the peculiar glory of the gospel, and of the interests of vital piety.
0.290	And I have lately perceived some things among yourselves that show that you are far from being out of danger, but on the contrary are remarkably exposed.
0.291	The older people may perhaps think themselves sufficiently fortified against infection; but it is fitting that all should beware of self-confidence and carnal security, and should remember those needful warnings of sacred Scripture, “Do not be high-minded, but fear,” and “let him who stands take heed lest he fall.”
0.292	But let the case of the older people be as it may, the rising generation is doubtless greatly exposed.
0.293	These principles are exceedingly appealing to corrupt nature, and are what young people, at least those who do not have their hearts established with grace, are easily led away by.
0.294	And if these principles should greatly prevail in this town, as they very recently have done in another large town I could name, formerly greatly noted for religion, and so for a long time, it will threaten the spiritual and eternal ruin of this people in the present and future generations.
0.295	Therefore you need the greatest and most diligent care and watchfulness with respect to this matter.
0.296	4. Another thing I would advise, that you may hereafter be a prosperous people, is that you give yourselves much to prayer.
0.297	God is the fountain of all blessing and prosperity, and he will be sought for his blessing.
0.298	I would therefore advise you not only to be constant in secret and family prayer, and in the public worship of God in his house, but also often to assemble yourselves in private prayer societies.
0.299	I would advise all who are grieved for the afflictions of Joseph, and deeply affected by the calamities of this town, whatever their opinion regarding the subject of our recent controversy, to meet together often for prayer, and to cry to God for his mercy to themselves, and mercy to this town, and mercy to Zion and the people of God in general throughout the world.
0.300	5. The last article of advice I would give (which doubtless greatly concerns your prosperity) is that you take great care with regard to the settling of a minister, to see who, or what kind of person, he is whom you settle; and particularly in these two respects:
0.301	(1) That he be a man of thoroughly sound principles in the scheme of doctrine that he maintains.
0.302	This you will stand in the greatest need of, especially in such a day of corruption as this.
0.303	And in order to obtain such a one, you will need to exercise extraordinary care and prudence.
0.304	I know the danger.
0.305	I know the manner of many young gentlemen of corrupt principles, their ways of concealing themselves, the fair, plausible disguises they are accustomed to put on, by which they deceive others, in order to maintain their own credit, and get themselves into others’ confidence and employment, and secure and establish their own interest, until they see a convenient opportunity to begin more openly to broach and spread their corrupt tenets.
0.306	(2) Labor to obtain a man who has an established character as a person of serious religion and fervent piety.
0.307	It is of vast importance that those who are settled in this work should be men of true piety, at all times and in all places; but more especially at some times, and in some towns and churches.
0.308	And this present time, which is a time in which religion is in danger from so many corruptions in doctrine and practice, is in a peculiar manner a day in which such ministers are necessary.
0.309	Nothing but sincere piety of heart is at all to be depended on, at such a time as this, as a security to a young man just coming into the world against the prevailing infection, or to engage him thoroughly in proper and successful endeavors to withstand and oppose the torrent of error and prejudice against the high, mysterious, evangelical doctrines of the religion of Jesus Christ, and their genuine effects in true experiential religion.
0.310	And this place is one that especially needs such a minister, for reasons obvious to all.
0.311	If you should happen to settle a minister who knows nothing truly of Christ and the way of salvation by him, nothing experientially of the nature of vital religion, alas, how exposed you will be, like sheep without a shepherd!
0.312	Here in this place there is need of one who shall be eminently fit to stand in the gap and make up the hedge, and who shall be like the chariots of Israel and its horsemen.
0.313	You need one who shall stand as a champion in the cause of truth and the power of godliness.
0.314	Having briefly mentioned these important articles of advice, nothing remains but that I now take my leave of you and bid you all farewell, wishing and praying for your best prosperity.
0.315	I would now commend your immortal souls to him who formerly committed them to me, expecting the day when I must meet you again before him who is the Judge of the living and the dead.
0.316	I desire that I may never forget this people, who have been so long my special charge, and that I may never cease to pray fervently for your prosperity.
0.317	May God bless you with a faithful pastor, one who is well acquainted with his mind and will, thoroughly warning sinners, wisely and skillfully searching professing Christians, and leading you in the way to eternal blessedness.
0.318	May you truly have a burning and shining light set up in this candlestick; and may you, not only for a season but during his whole life, and that a long life, be willing to rejoice in his light.
0.319	And let me be remembered in the prayers of all God’s people who are of a calm spirit, and are peaceable and faithful in Israel, of whatever opinion they may be with respect to the terms of church communion.
0.320	And let us all remember, and never forget, our future solemn meeting on that great day of the Lord; the day of infallible decision and of the everlasting and unalterable sentence. Amen.
