0.1	2 Corinthians 1:14.—As you also have acknowledged us in part, that we are your rejoicing, even as you also are ours in the day of the Lord Jesus.
0.2	The apostle, in the earlier part of the chapter, declares what great troubles he met with in the course of his ministry.
0.3	In the text and the two verses before it, he declares what his comforts and supports were under the troubles he met with.
0.4	There are four things in particular.
0.5	1. That he had approved himself to his own conscience, verse 12: “For this is our rejoicing, the testimony of our conscience: that in simplicity and godly sincerity, not by fleshly wisdom but by the grace of God, we have conducted ourselves in the world, and all the more so toward you.”
0.6	2. Another thing he speaks of as a matter of comfort is that, as he had approved himself to his own conscience, so he had also to the consciences of his hearers, the Corinthians, to whom he was now writing, and that they would approve of him at the day of judgment.
0.7	3. The hope he had of seeing the blessed fruit of his labors and sufferings in the ministry, in their happiness and glory, in that great day of accounts.
0.8	4. That, in his ministry among the Corinthians, he had approved himself to his Judge, who would approve and reward his faithfulness in that day.
0.9	These last three particulars are signified in my text and the preceding verse; and, indeed, all four are implied in the text. It is implied that the Corinthians had acknowledged him as their spiritual father and as one who had been faithful among them, and as the means of their future joy and glory at the day of judgment, and as one whom they would then see, and have a joyful meeting with as such. It is implied that the apostle expected at that time to have a joyful meeting with them before the Judge, and with joy to behold their glory, as the fruit of his labors; and so they would be his rejoicing. It is implied also that he then expected to be approved by the great Judge, when he and they should meet together before him; and that the Judge would then acknowledge his faithfulness, and that this had been the means of their glory; and that thus he would, as it were, give them to him as his crown of rejoicing.
0.10	But the apostle could not hope for this unless he had the testimony of his own conscience in his favor.
0.11	And therefore the words imply, in the strongest manner, that he had approved himself to his own conscience.
0.12	There is one thing implied in each of these particulars, and in every part of the text, which is the point I shall make the subject of my present discourse, namely:
H:0.8	DOCTRINE
0.13	Ministers, and the people who are under their care, must meet one another before Christ’s tribunal at the day of judgment.
0.14	Ministers, and the people who have been under their care, must be parted in this world, however well they have been united: if they are not separated before, they must be parted by death; and they may be separated while life continues.
0.15	We live in a world of change, where nothing is certain or stable; and where a little time, a few revolutions of the sun, bring to pass strange things, surprising alterations, in particular persons, in families, in towns and churches, in countries and nations.
0.16	It often happens that those who seem most united are, in a little time, most disunited, and at the greatest distance.
0.17	Thus ministers and people, between whom there has been the greatest mutual regard and the closest union, may not only differ in their judgments and be estranged in affection, but one may tear away from the other, and all relation between them be dissolved; the minister may be removed to a distant place, and they may never have anything more to do with one another in this world.
0.18	But if it is so, there is one more meeting that they must have, and that is on the last great day of accounts.
0.19	Here I would show,
0.20	I. In what manner ministers, and the people who have been under their care, shall meet one another at the day of judgment.
0.21	II. For what purposes.
0.22	III. For what reasons God has so ordered it that ministers and their people shall then meet together in such a manner, and for such purposes.
0.23	I. I would show, in some particulars, in what manner ministers, and the people who have been under their care, shall meet one another at the day of judgment.
0.24	Concerning this I would observe two things in general.
0.25	1. That they shall not then meet only as all mankind must then meet, but there will be something distinctive in the manner of their meeting.
0.26	2. That their meeting together at that time shall be very different from what used to take place in the house of God in this world.
0.27	1. They shall not meet on that day as all the world must then meet together.
0.28	I would observe a difference in two things.
0.29	(1) As to a clear, actual view, and a distinct knowledge and notice of each other.
0.30	Although the whole world will then be present, all mankind of all generations gathered in one vast assembly, with all of the angelic nature, both elect and fallen angels; yet we need not suppose that everyone will have a distinct and particular knowledge of each individual of the whole assembled multitude, which will undoubtedly consist of many millions of millions.
0.31	Though it is probable that men’s capacities will be much greater than in the present state, yet they will not be infinite; though their understanding and comprehension will be vastly extended, yet men will not be made gods.
0.32	Particular persons will probably have a very enlarged view of various parts and members of that vast assembly, and so of the proceedings of that great day; but yet it must be that, according to the nature of finite minds, some persons and some things on that day shall fall more under the notice of particular persons than others; and this (as we may well suppose) according as they shall have a nearer concern with some than with others in the transactions of the day.
0.33	There will be special reason why those who have had special concerns together in this world, in their state of probation, and whose mutual affairs will then be tried and judged, should especially be set in one another’s view.
0.34	Thus we may suppose that rulers and subjects, earthly judges and those whom they have judged, neighbors who have had mutual interaction, dealings and disputes, heads of families and their children and servants, shall then meet, and be set together in a special way.
0.35	And this will especially be so with ministers and their people. It is evident from the text that these shall be in each other’s view, shall distinctly know each other, and shall take particular notice of one another at that time.
0.36	(2) They shall meet together as having a special concern with one another in the great transactions of that day.
0.37	Although they shall meet the whole world at that time, yet they will not have any immediate and particular concern with all.
0.38	Indeed, the far greater part of those who shall then be gathered together will be such as they have had no dealings with in their state of probation, and so will have no mutual concerns to be judged.
0.39	But as to ministers, and the people who have been under their care, they will be such as have had much immediate concern with one another, in matters of the greatest importance that mankind ever have to do with one another in.
0.40	Therefore they especially must meet and be brought together before the Judge, as having special concern with one another in the design and business of that great day of accounts.
0.41	Thus their meeting, as to its manner, will be different from the meeting of mankind in general.
0.42	2. Their meeting at the day of judgment will be very different from their meetings with one another in this world.
0.43	Ministers and their people, while their relation continues, often meet together in this world.
0.44	They are accustomed to meet from Sabbath to Sabbath, and at other times, for the public worship of God, and the administration of ordinances, and the solemn services of God’s house.
0.45	And besides these meetings, they also have occasions to meet for deciding and managing their church affairs, for the exercise of church discipline, and for settling and adjusting those things which concern the purity and good order of public administrations.
0.46	But their meeting at the day of judgment will be exceedingly different, in its manner and circumstances, from any such meetings and interviews as they have with one another in the present state.
0.47	I would observe how, in a few particulars.
0.48	(1) Now they meet together in a preparatory, changeable state, but then in an unchangeable state.
0.49	Now sinners in the congregation meet their minister in a state in which they are capable of a saving change, capable of being turned, through God’s blessing on the ministrations and labors of their pastor, from the power of Satan to God; and of being brought out of a state of guilt, condemnation and wrath, into a state of peace and favor with God, to the enjoyment of the privileges of his children, and a title to their eternal inheritance.
0.50	And saints now meet their minister with great remains of corruption, and sometimes under great spiritual difficulties and affliction; and therefore they are still proper subjects for the means of a happy alteration of their state, consisting in a greater freedom from these things, which they have reason to hope for by way of attending on the ordinances, and of which God is commonly pleased to make his ministers the instruments.
0.51	And ministers and their people now meet in order to bring about such happy changes; these are the great benefits sought in their solemn meetings in this world.
0.52	But when they meet together at the day of judgment, it will be far otherwise.
0.53	They will not then meet in order to use means for bringing about any such changes; for they will all meet in an unchangeable state.
0.54	Sinners will be in an unchangeable state: those who shall then be under the guilt and power of sin, and have the wrath of God abiding on them, shall be beyond all remedy or possibility of change, and shall meet their ministers without any hope of relief or remedy, or of getting any good by their means.
0.55	And as for the saints, they will already be perfectly delivered from all their formerly remaining corruption, temptation, and calamities of every kind, and set forever out of their reach; and no deliverance, no happy alteration, will remain to be accomplished by the use of the means of grace under the administrations of ministers.
0.56	It will then be pronounced, “Let him who is unjust be unjust still; and let him who is filthy be filthy still; and let him who is righteous be righteous still; and let him who is holy be holy still.”
0.57	(2) Then they shall meet together in a state of clear, certain and infallible light.
0.58	Ministers are set as guides and teachers, and are represented in Scripture as lights set up in the churches; and in the present state they meet their people from time to time in order to instruct and enlighten them, to correct their mistakes, and to be a voice behind them when they turn aside to the right hand or to the left, saying, “This is the way; walk in it”; to demonstrate and confirm the truth by setting forth the proper evidences of it, and to refute errors and corrupt opinions, to convince those in error and establish those who doubt.
0.59	But when Christ comes to judgment, every error and false opinion shall be detected; all deceit and illusion shall vanish away before the light of that day, as the darkness of the night vanishes at the appearance of the rising sun; and every doctrine of the word of God shall then appear in full evidence, and none shall remain unconvinced; all shall know the truth with the greatest certainty, and there shall be no mistakes to correct.
0.60	Now ministers and their people may disagree in their judgments concerning some matters of religion, and may sometimes meet to confer together about those things in which they differ, and to hear the reasons that may be offered on one side and the other; and all may be ineffective as to any conviction of the truth: they may meet and part again, no more agreed than before; and the side which was in the wrong may remain so still. Sometimes the meetings of ministers with their people, in such a case of disagreeing opinions, are accompanied by unhappy debate and controversy, conducted with much prejudice and lack of candor; not tending to light and conviction, but rather to confirm and increase darkness, and to establish opposition to the truth and the estrangement of affection from one another.
0.61	But when they shall hereafter meet together at the day of judgment, before the tribunal of the great Judge, the mind and will of Christ will be made known; and there shall no longer be any debate or difference of opinion; the evidence of the truth shall appear beyond all dispute, and all controversies shall be finally and forever decided.
0.62	Now ministers meet their people in order to enlighten and awaken the consciences of sinners: setting before them the great evil and danger of sin, the strictness of God’s law, their own wickedness of heart and practice, the great guilt they are under, the wrath that abides upon them, and their powerlessness, blindness, poverty, and helpless and ruined condition: but all is often in vain; notwithstanding all their ministers can say, they still remain dull and unawakened, and their consciences unconvinced.
0.63	But it will not be so at their last meeting at the day of judgment. Sinners, when they meet their minister before their great Judge, will not meet him with a dull conscience: they will then be fully convinced of the truth of those things which they formerly heard from him, concerning the greatness and terrible majesty of God, his holiness and hatred of sin, and his awful justice in punishing it, the strictness of his law, and the dreadfulness and truth of his threatenings, and their own unspeakable guilt and misery; and they shall never again be insensible of these things: the eyes of conscience will then be fully enlightened, and shall never be blinded again; the mouth of conscience shall then be opened, and shall never be shut any more.
0.64	Now ministers meet with their people, in public and private, in order to enlighten them concerning the state of their souls; to open and apply the rules of God’s word to them, so that they may search their own hearts and discern the state they are in.
0.65	But now ministers have no infallible discernment of the state of the souls of their own people; and the most skillful of them are liable to mistakes, and often are mistaken in things of this nature.
0.66	Nor are the people able to know with certainty the state of their minister, or one another’s state; very often those who pass among them for saints, and perhaps eminent saints, are great hypocrites; and on the other hand, those are sometimes censured, or hardly received into their charity, who are indeed some of God’s jewels.
0.67	And nothing is more common than for men to be mistaken concerning their own state: many who are abominable to God, and the children of his wrath, think highly of themselves as his precious saints and dear children.
0.68	Indeed, there is reason to think that often some who are most bold in their confidence of their safe and happy state, and think themselves not only true saints but the most eminent saints in the congregation, are in a peculiar manner a smoke in God’s nose.
0.69	And so it undoubtedly often is in those congregations where the word of God is most faithfully dispensed, notwithstanding all that ministers can say in their clearest explanations and most searching applications of the doctrines and rules of God’s word to the souls of their hearers, in their meetings with one another.
0.70	But on the day of judgment they shall have another sort of meeting; then the secrets of every heart shall be made manifest, and every man’s state shall be perfectly known, as in 1 Corinthians 4,
0.71	verse 5: “Therefore judge nothing before the time, until the Lord comes, who will both bring to light the hidden things of darkness and make known the purposes of the hearts; and then every man shall have praise from God.”
0.72	Then none shall be deceived concerning his own state, nor be in doubt about it any longer.
0.73	There shall be an eternal end to all the false conceit and vain hopes of deluded hypocrites, and to all the doubts and fears of sincere Christians.
0.74	And then all shall know the state of one another’s souls: the people shall know whether their minister has been sincere and faithful, and the ministers shall know the state of every one of their people, and to whom the word and ordinances of God have been an aroma of life to life, and to whom an aroma of death to death.
0.75	Now in this present state it often happens that when ministers and people meet together to debate and manage their church affairs, especially in a state of controversy, they are ready to judge and censure one another with regard to each other’s views and designs, and the principles and ends by which each is influenced; and are greatly mistaken in their judgment, and wrong one another with regard to each other’s views and designs and the principles and ends by which each is influenced, and are greatly mistaken in their judgment, and wrong one another in their censures.
0.76	But at that future meeting, things will be set in a true and perfect light, and the principles and aims from which everyone has acted shall be certainly known; and there will be an end to all errors of this kind, and all unrighteous censures.
0.77	(3) In this world, ministers and their people often meet together to hear of and wait upon an unseen Lord; but at the day of judgment they shall meet in his most immediate and visible presence.
0.78	Ministers, who now often meet their people to preach to them the King eternal, immortal, and invisible, to convince them that there is a God, and to declare to them what manner of being he is, and to convince them that he governs and will judge the world, and that there is a future state of rewards and punishments, and to preach to them a Christ in heaven and at the right hand of God in an unseen world, shall then meet their people in the most immediate and perceptible presence of this great God, Savior and Judge, appearing in the most plain, visible and open manner, with great glory, with all his holy angels, before them and the whole world.
0.79	They shall not meet them to hear about an absent Christ, an unseen Lord and future Judge; but to appear before that Judge, and to be set together in the presence of that supreme Lord, in his immense glory and awesome majesty, of whom they have heard so often in their meetings together on earth.
0.80	(4) The meeting, on the last day, of ministers and the people who have been under their care, will not be attended by anyone with a careless, heedless heart.
0.81	With such a heart their meetings in this world are often attended by many persons, having little regard for him whom they profess to adore together in the solemn duties of his public worship, taking little heed to their own thoughts or the frame of their minds, not attending to the business they are engaged in, or considering the end for which they have come together.
0.82	But the meeting on that great day will be very different: there will not be one careless heart, no sleeping, no wandering of mind from the great concern of the meeting, no inattentiveness to the business of the day, no disregard of the presence they are in, or of those great things which they shall hear from Christ at that meeting, or which they formerly heard from him and of him by their ministers, in their meetings in a state of trial, or which they shall then hear their ministers declaring concerning them before their Judge.
0.83	Having observed these things concerning the manner and circumstances of this future meeting of ministers and the people who have been under their care, before the tribunal of Christ at the day of judgment, I now proceed,
0.84	II. To observe for what purposes they shall then meet.
0.85	1. To give an account, before the great Judge, of their behavior toward one another in the relation they stood in to each other in this world.
0.86	Ministers are sent forth by Christ to their people on his business; they are his servants and messengers; and, when they have finished their service, they must return to their master to give him an account of what they have done, and of the reception they have had in performing their ministry.
0.87	Thus we find, in Luke 14,
0.88	verses 16–21, that when the servant who was sent out to call the guests to the great supper had done his errand, and finished his appointed service, he returned to his master and gave him an account of what he had done, and of the reception he had received.
0.89	And when the master, being angry, sent his servant to others, he returns again and gives his master an account of his conduct and success.
0.90	So we read, in Hebrews 13,
0.91	verse 17, of ministers being rulers in the house of God, “who watch for souls, as those who must give account.”
0.92	And we see by the aforementioned Luke 14 that ministers must give an account to their master, not only of their own behavior in the discharge of their office, but also of their people’s reception of them, and of the treatment they have met with among them.
0.93	And therefore, as they will be called to give an account of both, they shall give an account at the great day of accounts in the presence of their people; they and their people both being present before their Judge.
0.94	Faithful ministers will then give an account with joy concerning those who have received them well and made good use of their ministry; and these will be given to them, on that day, as their crown of rejoicing.
0.95	And at the same time they will give an account of the ill treatment of those who have not received them and their messages from Christ well: they will meet these, not as they used to do in this world, to counsel and warn them, but to bear witness against them, and, as their judges and assessors with Christ, to condemn them.
0.96	And on the other hand, the people will, on that day, rise up in judgment against wicked and unfaithful ministers who have sought their own temporal interest more than the good of the souls of their flock.
0.97	2. At that time ministers, and the people who have been under their care, shall meet together before Christ, so that he may judge between them as to any controversies which have existed between them in this world.
0.98	So it very often happens in this evil world that great differences and controversies arise between ministers and the people who are under their pastoral care.
0.99	Though they are under the greatest obligations to live in peace, more than persons in almost any relation whatever; and although contests and dissensions between persons so related are, on many accounts, the most unhappy and terrible in their consequences of any sort of contention; yet how frequent such contentions have been!
0.100	Sometimes a people contend with their ministers about their doctrine, sometimes about their administrations and conduct, and sometimes about their financial support; and sometimes such contests continue a long time; and sometimes they are decided in this world according to the prevailing interest of one party or the other, rather than by the word of God and the reason of things; and sometimes such controversies never have any proper resolution in this world.
0.101	But at the day of judgment there will be a full, perfect and everlasting decision of them.
0.102	The infallible Judge, the infinite fountain of light, truth and justice, will judge between the contending parties, and will declare what the truth is, who is in the right, and what agrees with his mind and will.
0.103	And for this purpose the parties must stand together before him on the last day, which will be the great day of finishing and determining all controversies, correcting all mistakes, and abolishing all unrighteous judgments, errors and confusions, which have existed before in the world of mankind.
0.104	3. Ministers, and the people who have been under their care, must meet together at that time to receive an eternal sentence and retribution from the Judge, in the presence of each other, according to their behavior in the relation they stood in to one another in the present state.
0.105	The Judge will not only declare justice, but he will do justice between ministers and their people.
0.106	He will declare what is right between them, approving him who has been just and faithful, and condemning the unjust; and perfect truth and equity shall prevail in the sentence which he passes, in the rewards he bestows and the punishments which he inflicts.
0.107	There shall be a glorious reward to faithful ministers: to those who have been successful, Daniel 12,
0.108	verse 3: “And those who are wise shall shine as the brightness of the heavens; and those who turn many to righteousness, as the stars forever and ever”; and also to those who have been faithful, and yet not successful, Isaiah 49,
0.109	verse 4: “Then I said, I have labored in vain, I have spent my strength for nothing; yet surely my judgment is with the Lord, and my reward with my God.”
0.110	And those who have received and welcomed them well shall be gloriously rewarded, Matthew 10,
0.111	verses 40, 41: “Whoever receives you receives me, and whoever receives me receives him who sent me.
0.112	Whoever receives a prophet in the name of a prophet will receive a prophet’s reward; and whoever receives a righteous man in the name of a righteous man will receive a righteous man’s reward.”
0.113	Such people and their faithful ministers shall be each other’s crown of rejoicing, 1 Thessalonians 2,
0.114	verses 19, 20: “For what is our hope, or joy, or crown of rejoicing?
0.115	Are not you yourselves, in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ at his coming?
0.116	For you are our glory and joy.”
0.117	And in the text: We are your rejoicing, as you also are ours, in the day of the Lord Jesus.
0.118	But those who mistreat Christ’s faithful ministers, especially in that in which they are faithful, shall be severely punished, Matthew 10,
0.119	verses 14, 15: “And whoever does not receive you or hear your words, when you leave that house or city, shake the dust off your feet.
0.120	Truly I say to you, it shall be more bearable for the sinners of Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of judgment than for that city.”
0.121	Deuteronomy 33:8–11: “And of Levi he said, Let your Urim and your Thummim be with your holy one....
0.122	They shall teach Jacob your judgments, and Israel your law....
0.123	Bless, Lord, his substance, and accept the work of his hands; strike through the loins of those who rise against him, and of those who hate him, so that they rise no more.”
0.124	On the other hand, those ministers who are found to have been unfaithful shall have a most terrible punishment.
0.125	See Ezekiel 33:6; Matthew 23:1–33.
0.126	Thus justice shall be administered on the great day to ministers and their people.
0.127	And to that end they shall meet together, that they may not only receive justice themselves, but see justice done to the other party: for this is the purpose of that great day, to reveal or declare the righteous judgment of God, Romans 2,
0.128	verse 5. Ministers shall have justice done to them, and they shall see justice done to their people; and the people shall receive justice and see justice done to their minister.
0.129	And so all things will be adjusted and settled forever between them; everyone being sentenced and repaid according to his works, either in receiving and wearing a crown of eternal joy and glory, or in suffering everlasting shame and pain.
0.130	I come now to the next thing proposed, namely,
0.131	III. To give some reasons why we may suppose God has so ordered it that ministers, and the people who have been under their care, shall meet together at the day of judgment in such a manner and for such purposes.
0.132	There are two things which I would now observe:
0.133	1. The mutual concerns of ministers and their people are of the greatest importance.
0.134	The Scripture declares that God will bring every work into judgment, with every secret thing, whether it is good or whether it is evil. It is fitting that all the concerns and all the behavior of mankind, both public and private, should be brought at last before God’s tribunal and finally determined by an infallible Judge; but it is especially necessary that it should be so with affairs of very great importance.
0.135	Now the mutual concerns of a Christian minister and his church and congregation are of the vastest importance: in many respects, of much greater moment than the temporal concerns of the greatest earthly monarchs and their kingdoms or empires.
0.136	It is of vast consequence how ministers discharge their office and conduct themselves toward their people in the work of the ministry, and in affairs pertaining to it. It is also a matter of vast importance how a people receive and treat a faithful minister of Christ, and what use they make of his ministry.
0.137	These things have a more immediate and direct bearing on the great and final end for which man was made, and on the eternal welfare of mankind, than any of the temporal concerns of men, whether public or private.
0.138	And therefore it is especially fitting that these affairs should be brought into judgment and openly determined and settled in truth and righteousness; and that, to this end, ministers and their people should meet together before the all-knowing and infallible Judge.
0.139	2. The mutual concerns of ministers and their people have a special relation to the main things pertaining to the day of judgment.
0.140	They have a special relation to that great and divine person who will then appear as Judge.
0.141	Ministers are his messengers, sent forth by him; and, in their office and administrations among their people, they represent his person and stand in his place, as those who are sent to declare his mind, to do his work, and to speak and act in his name.
0.142	And therefore it is especially fitting that they should return to him to give an account of their work and success.
0.143	The king is judge of all his subjects; they are all accountable to him.
0.144	But it is more especially necessary that the king’s ministers, who are especially entrusted with the administration of his kingdom, and who are sent out on some special negotiation, should return to him to give an account of themselves, of their discharge of their trust, and of the reception they have met with.
0.145	Ministers are not only messengers of the person who on the last day will appear as Judge, but the errand they are sent upon, and the affairs committed to them as his ministers, most immediately concern his honor and the interest of his kingdom.
0.146	The work they are sent to do is to promote the designs of his administration and government; and therefore their business with their people has a close relation to the day of judgment; for the great purpose of that day is completely to settle and establish the affairs of his kingdom, to adjust all things that pertain to it, that everything opposed to the interests of his kingdom may be removed, and that everything which contributes to its completeness and glory may be perfected and confirmed, so that this great King may receive his due honor and glory.
0.147	Again, the mutual concerns of ministers and their people have a direct relation to the concerns of the day of judgment, as the business of ministers with their people is to promote the eternal salvation of the souls of men and their escape from eternal damnation; and the day of judgment is the day appointed for that end, openly to decide and settle men’s eternal state, to fix some in a state of eternal salvation and to bring their salvation to its utmost completion, and to fix others in a state of everlasting damnation and most perfect misery.
0.148	The mutual concerns of ministers and people have a most direct relation to the day of judgment, as the very design of the work of the ministry is the people’s preparation for that day.
0.149	Ministers are sent to warn them of the approach of that day, to forewarn them of the dreadful sentence then to be pronounced on the wicked, and to declare to them the blessed sentence then to be pronounced on the righteous, and to use means with them so that they may escape the wrath which is then to come on the ungodly, and obtain the reward then to be bestowed on the saints.
0.150	And as the mutual concerns of ministers and their people have so close and direct a relation to that day, it is especially fitting that those concerns should be brought into that day, and there settled and resolved; and that, in order to this, ministers and their people should meet and appear together before the great Judge on that day.
H:0.62	APPLICATION
0.151	The use I would make of the things which have been observed is to lead the people here present who have been under my pastoral care to some reflections, and to give them some advice suited to our present circumstances, relating to what has lately been done toward our being separated, as to the relation in which we have until now stood to one another; but expecting to meet each other before the great tribunal at the day of judgment.
0.152	The deep and serious consideration of that future, most solemn meeting of ours is certainly most suitable at such a time as this, since there has so lately been that done which, in all probability, will (as to the relation we have until now stood in) be followed by an everlasting separation.
0.153	How often have we met together in the house of God in this relation!
0.154	How often have I spoken to you, instructed, counseled, warned, directed and fed you, and administered ordinances among you, as the people who were committed to my care, and whose precious souls I had charge of!
0.155	But in all probability this will never be again.
0.156	The prophet Jeremiah (chapter 25,
0.157	verse 3) reminds the people how long he had labored among them in the work of the ministry: “From the thirteenth year of Josiah the son of Amon, king of Judah, even to this day, that is, the twenty-third year, the word of the Lord came to me, and I have spoken to you, rising early and speaking.”
0.158	I am not about to compare myself with the prophet Jeremiah; but in this respect I can say as he did, that “I have spoken the word of God to you into the twenty-third year, rising early and speaking.”
0.159	It was twenty-three years, on the 15th day of last February, since I have labored in the work of the ministry in the relation of a pastor to this church and congregation.
0.160	And though my strength has been weakness, having always labored under great infirmity of body, besides my insufficiency for so great a charge in other respects, yet I have not spared my feeble strength, but have exerted it for the good of your souls.
0.161	I can appeal to you as the apostle does to his hearers, Galatians 4,
0.162	verse 13: “You know how through weakness of the flesh I preached the gospel to you.”
0.163	I have spent the prime of my life and strength in labors for your eternal welfare.
0.164	You are my witnesses that what strength I have had I have not neglected in idleness, nor spent in pursuing worldly schemes and managing temporal affairs for the advancement of my outward estate and the enlarging of myself and my family; but I have given myself wholly to the work of the ministry, laboring in it night and day, rising early and applying myself to this great business to which Christ appointed me.
0.165	I have found the work of the ministry among you to be a great work indeed, a work of exceeding care, labor and difficulty: many have been the heavy burdens that I have borne in it, to which my strength has been very unequal.
0.166	God called me to bear these burdens; and I bless his name that he has so supported me as to keep me from sinking under them, and that his power in this has been shown in my weakness; so that although I have often been troubled on every side, yet I have not been distressed; perplexed, but not in despair; cast down, but not destroyed.
0.167	But now I have reason to think that the work which I had to do as your minister is finished: you have publicly rejected me, and my opportunities cease.
