0.1	“Confess your faults one to another, and pray one for another, that you may be healed.” — James 5:16
0.2	In the present discourse the following points demand our attention.
0.3	I. What is intended by the injunction, “Confess your faults one to another”?
0.4	II. What is implied in complying with it?
0.5	III. The reasons for this injunction.
0.6	IV. What is intended by the injunction, “Pray one for another”?
H:0.6	I. What is meant by the injunction, “Confess your faults one to another”?
0.7	1. There is no reason to suppose that this text gives any support to the Roman Catholic doctrine of confession to priests.
0.8	You understand the doctrine so long prevalent in that communion under the name of “auricular confession,” so called because it was made privately into the ear of the priest.
0.9	This doctrine holds that all are bound to make auricular confession of every act and of every thought about which their conscience is at all troubled.
0.10	Consequently the system makes the priest the repository of all the sins of the church—of all the most private sins of all its members, male or female, which must be confessed on pain of damnation.
0.11	Everyone who is acquainted with the results of this system knows that they have naturally been pernicious to the purity and morals of both priest and people.
0.12	It is most evident that the apostle did not have such a system in view and could never approve it.
0.13	Confessing faults one to another is not the same thing as confessing all faults to the priest alone.
0.14	2. Although there is nothing in the text that specifically defines the sins in view, yet we are doubtless to understand the apostle here to refer primarily to faults committed against others, and to command the confession of faults to those whom we have injured.
0.15	The doctrine of confession in this form is abundantly taught and implied in Scripture, and is therefore, we may suppose, the particular thing intended here.
0.16	The principle involved in this may, however, extend somewhat further, namely, (1) to the confession or disclosure of our besetting sins and of our particular temptations and weaknesses.
0.17	It is plain that by making our trusted Christian friends aware of these temptations and besetting weaknesses of ours, we may enlist their sympathy and prayers on our behalf, and so secure valuable help in resisting and overcoming these temptations.
0.18	(2) The principle of the text may also include those sins which, though not properly committed against particular individuals, are nevertheless naturally committed in the presence of others, and therefore become a scandal to religion and a stumbling block to our associates.
0.19	For example, irritability, which so often causes others to stumble and becomes a besetting sin; censoriousness—the practice of speaking harshly of others, which is often a painful grievance not only to those against whom we speak evil, but to every benevolent mind that hears us.
0.20	These and other sins of this kind, it is plain, should be confessed.
0.21	In saying these things, you will notice, I do not say that men are bound to reveal everything they know—all the sins of which they think themselves guilty—even those known to no one but themselves and God.
0.22	It does not appear that the Bible makes the duty of confession to men this universal.
H:0.12	II. What is implied in obeying this injunction?
0.23	1. That we are thoroughly convinced of our sin; that we admit not only the fact but its wickedness, as a sin against God and our neighbor.
0.24	It is one thing for a man to confess his fault as a real fault and a sin, and quite another to acknowledge the fact without recognizing its heinous guilt.
0.25	Hence our text must imply that we truly understand and sincerely confess the actual guilt of our sin.
0.26	2. That we repent of and renounce our sin.
0.27	Confession is no better than an insult to God and man if it is not accompanied by repentance and renunciation of the sin confessed.
0.28	3. Humility is also implied.
0.29	By this is meant that disposition which is glad to take its own place, even though it is a very low place—which does not seek to gloss over, but truly unmasks oneself and naturally seeks the very place that seems to belong to us.
0.30	Commonly the great difficulty found in confessing is that men are too proud.
0.31	They do not like to place themselves as low in the estimation of others as they ought to be.
0.32	Now humility stands directly opposed to this pride, and implies a willingness to come down to its own low place.
0.33	A forced and extorted confession is not what the text commands.
0.34	When a man confesses under the sting of a conscience like a scorpion, or because, convicted by public disclosures and confounded by appalling revelations, he cannot do otherwise and still maintain any show of Christianity—such confessions, though they may cost a proud man a tremendous struggle, are yet in real value exceedingly cheap.
0.35	4. Genuine confession implies readiness to make restitution for the wrong we have done.
0.36	Indeed, confession is in one sense an element of restitution—a part of restitution itself; for example, if you have injured your neighbor in property or in reputation, to confess the fact is one step in the process of restitution.
0.37	But it is by no means the whole.
0.38	If the case involves property, you must make restitution in kind; if it involves personal reputation, you are bound to make restitution as far as you can.
0.39	This is really implied in the spirit of this injunction.
0.40	No man in his right mind could suppose that, if he had stolen, his confession would be worth a straw without full restitution.
0.41	And the same principle should certainly apply in all cases where restitution is possible.
0.42	5. It is implied that the confession be full and free, not scanty and constrained.
0.43	Let it be made with a free, full, and honest heart, in such a spirit and manner as will satisfy the reasonable expectations of the injured party.
0.44	How can we suppose that God will be satisfied with anything less?
0.45	Suppose you have wronged a man, and he knows it and feels it.
0.46	You come to him and, after a fashion, you confess; but instead of making a full and satisfactory confession, you merely hint at your wrong deeds.
0.47	He knows that you are not an honest man, and that you have not even met the demands of your own conscience.
0.48	Such a confession can do neither you nor your neighbor any good.
0.49	Confession therefore should be poured out freely as water, full and thorough.
0.50	6. Legitimate confession implies and involves throwing yourself upon mercy.
0.51	When people thoroughly confess their sins to God, they cease to justify themselves before Him and throw themselves entirely upon His mercy.
0.52	They rest upon His clemency alone and leave themselves wholly in the hands of God.
0.53	In a similar way, when you confess to a man you throw yourself upon his clemency; you confess your wrong and give up every plea of justification.
0.54	7. Where people confess their besetting sins, the act implies a sincere desire to be holy, and an honest determination to give up sin and be rid of it forever.
0.55	I have often been struck by the different ways in which different individuals hear the announcement of the doctrine of sanctification.
0.56	Proclaim to a body of professing Christians that through grace they may in this life be delivered from all sin, and the way they receive it will often speak volumes in revealing their real character.
0.57	It serves to show their exact attitude toward sin.
0.58	For example, I once preached in Rochester on this subject, and no sooner had the congregation dispersed than one man came to me, saying with great earnestness, “Mr. Finney, that is too good news to be true.”
0.59	There was a minister in that audience, however, who did not regard it as good news at all.
0.60	He did not seem to treat the doctrine as if he had any desire for it to be true.
0.61	Who has not observed this very difference?
0.62	Preach the doctrine of a present salvation from sin to a man who is truly panting to be delivered from sin, and he will hail it with intense interest, if not at once with an open-hearted welcome.
0.63	He will receive it most readily if he thinks it may be true.
0.64	He will long for it to prove true, and his heart will put no obstacles in the way of his candidly investigating its evidence and heartily embracing all that the evidence can be found to support.
0.65	But if he does not want it to prove true, he will quibble against it bitterly—will stubbornly reject its evidence, and of course will be likely to reveal himself unconsciously as the enemy of all righteousness.
0.66	He will show that he has no interest in being made free from sin at present—no real interest in being free from sin ever.
0.67	These revelations of character are far better testimony to one’s real state of mind than can be given in any other way.
0.68	No man who in his heart longed to become holy has ever yet quibbled against this doctrine.
0.69	Even if he does not believe the doctrine is true, and therefore feels compelled to oppose it, there will be no spirit of quibbling.
0.70	When you see men quibble at any doctrine, you may know they do not want it to be true.
0.71	It is not congenial to their hearts.
0.72	Who does not know that the doctrine of entire sanctification has lately met with a great deal of opposition under a pretense of zeal for the truth and opposition to error, which after all has been nothing more nor less, before God and the whole world, than a mere spirit of quibbling and a most evident opposition to the truth and unwillingness to have that doctrine proved true?
0.73	It has been mournful and appalling to notice the display of real opposition to holiness that has shown itself in many quarters within the last few years.
0.74	I am sure I do not say this censoriously.
0.75	It is what everybody knows to be true who has kept his eyes open to the real displays that have been made through the pulpit and the press, through church organizations, and in many other ways against the doctrine of holiness in this life.
0.76	But to return. When Christians reveal their deep sin to their brethren, it is always implied that they are truly panting after holiness—that they abhor these sins they confess, and are ready to do anything, however humiliating, to put to death these horrible sins they so much hate.
H:0.28	III. Reasons for the injunction, “Confess your faults to one another.”
0.77	With respect to personal injuries inflicted on others, the injunction is founded on justice.
0.78	Confession is a necessary element of restitution.
0.79	We cannot be just toward our injured brother without it.
0.80	Again, it is indispensable to peace with God.
0.81	It is by nature impossible for us to have peace with God without confessing known offenses against our neighbor.
0.82	Who needs to be told that God can have no fellowship with injustice, and of course none with those who act unjustly!
0.83	Does not His eye mark all iniquity? Your injured neighbor might come before the Lord and say, “Lord, he has wronged me, You know it, and now will You hold fellowship with him?”
0.84	Confession is just as indispensable to peace of mind as it is to peace with God.
0.85	Suppose all the world were at peace with us, and, if it were possible, suppose God were too; still we could not persuade ourselves that we are right.
0.86	Conscience will forever reproach us until we confess and do all we possibly can under the circumstances to make restitution for our wrong deeds.
0.87	Confession is indispensable to peace with those whom we have injured.
0.88	Although the injured man may have no ill will toward us—no spirit inconsistent with the gospel—no inclination to retaliate, yet it is impossible for him to have the spirit of Christian sympathy and harmony with us as long as he knows us to be impenitent and unwilling to confess known wrongs.
0.89	This is a difficulty—a barrier between us—which cannot be removed until he is satisfied that I am honest; and this satisfaction he cannot have until I confess my fault.
0.90	Confession is indispensable to peace and sympathy with all the just and good.
0.91	While it is true that neither God nor the injured party can be at peace with the wrongdoer until he confesses, the same is equally true of all holy beings.
0.92	Their minds cannot be in a peaceful and harmonious state toward me while they know that I am guilty of wrongdoing and will not confess.
0.93	As long as they know me to be in this state they must regard me as a transgressor, and this must create an everlasting barrier between me and them.
0.94	They may have no inclination to retaliate or to injure me; on the contrary, they may be most earnest in prayer for me that God would humble me and break down my pride.
0.95	Their attitude toward me may be nothing other than that of true benevolence; yet until I confess they cannot be in Christian sympathy and friendship with me.
0.96	The thing is by nature impossible.
0.97	The same is true even of the wicked.
0.98	They cannot be at peace with me until I confess my wrongs.
0.99	It is remarkable that a wicked man condemns wrongdoing just as truly as a good man does, although he may do the very same thing himself.
0.100	His moral judgments about right and wrong may be just and truthful despite his own bad character.
0.101	Let him have a case in which his own selfishness does not bribe his conscience and blind his understanding, and he will decide that wrong is wrong and ought to be confessed and put away.
0.102	You cannot, therefore, have the respect even of wicked men unless you confess your known wrongs.
0.103	Even the wickedest men or devils in hell cannot be satisfied that your course is right until you confess.
0.104	They might not love you if you were to become holy, but they certainly can never esteem you until you do—never until you confess and abandon all your known wrongdoing.
0.105	They can never justify and approve your sins.
0.106	Confession of wrong is indispensable to self-respect.
0.107	It is by nature impossible for you to respect yourself while you withhold proper confession of your sins.
0.108	By the very laws of your moral nature this can never be.
0.109	Who does not know this?
0.110	If you do not know this, you certainly can know it, and by a very little careful attention to the warnings of your own conscience you certainly can know it.
0.111	Surely you can gain nothing by resisting the claims of an enlightened conscience, for if all the universe should leave you alone in your sin, your conscience would not and could not.
0.112	Still its voice would ring in your ear, and you could not silence its reproaches.
0.113	Have you not sometimes been ashamed of yourself because you were too proud to confess?
0.114	This very shame of making confession has filled your soul with bitter agony and the keenest self-reproach, and you have sometimes felt that it is a greater shame and a deeper guilt than the original wrong itself.
0.115	Suppose you were to meet the very man whom you have wronged.
0.116	The best opportunity is given to make the confession you know is due—but shame and pride seal your lips.
0.117	Not a word of confession is whispered.
0.118	You go away full of remorse and a sense of guilty shame, for you can scarcely help feeling that the last sin is worse than the first.
0.119	As a physician in these circumstances once cried out, “Oh, how full of hell I am!” so you perhaps are sometimes compelled to say.
0.120	You know that what you experience in your soul is a foretaste of hell, for you are all too sure that you deserve the deepest, darkest place in the dwellings of the damned.
0.121	No one else can have confidence in you or respect for you as long as it is understood that you will not confess known wrongs.
0.122	You may labor to restore yourself to their confidence—but you are doomed to labor in vain.
0.123	You may think to live it down, and wash out by good deeds the foul stain attached to you because of unconfessed bad deeds, but you will certainly toil to no purpose.
0.124	Who can think you an honest man?
0.125	The truth is, they know better; for you have given them the best possible evidence that you are supremely proud and selfish.
0.126	Put on the air of a saint as much as you like, you cannot make them trust you as an honest Christian man until you confess your sins wherever confession is, in the nature of the case, fitting and required.
0.127	Consider, further, that you can never regain the confidence of discerning men until you are willing to go further in confession than you are absolutely compelled to go.
0.128	It often happens that men will go as far as they must, but no further.
0.129	They show plainly enough that they move along the path of confession only because they are pushed so hard that they cannot help it.
0.130	Step by step—one step at a time, just as fast as they must, but no faster—they move along.
0.131	I have often stood and watched this strange process with astonishment.
0.132	The guilty man finds that one thing has come out too far to be denied any longer; so he confesses that—but nothing more.
0.133	“No,” he says, “that is all.”
0.134	Soon another feature of the same transaction comes out, blacker than the first.
0.135	“Sir, you are guilty of this too!”
0.136	“No, I am not.
0.137	You cannot prove it.”
0.138	“Yes, my friend, it is proved beyond all question.”
0.139	“Oh, well then, I confess that; I am very sorry; but that is all.
0.140	There is nothing more.”
0.141	Well, by the next day some new point is brought up, and the same road is traveled all over again.
0.142	Denial, conviction, confession—and then, to save all the rest of his character, he will beg you to accept his solemn word that there is nothing more of the kind to be revealed.
0.143	Now such a man often uses up his character faster than he realizes.
0.144	He little thinks how cheap his forced confessions become, and how little confidence is placed in his most solemn declarations that he has made a clean sweep in confession.
0.145	It is far better to go to the bottom at the outset.
0.146	Yes, go to the bottom—pour it all out—all of it, so thoroughly that neither man nor God can find anything more belonging to that matter.
0.147	Do this, and there is hope for you.
0.148	Men will say of you, “Now we know he is honest-hearted, and though he has done wrong, yet he lays his heart wide open, and we can trust him again.”
0.149	It is not in human nature to resist the appeal that earnest, honest-hearted confession makes to the human heart.
0.150	Again, confession of personal wrongs is exceedingly useful to both parties concerned.
0.151	It greatly relieves the guilty man, rolling a mountain’s weight off his soul and restoring sweet peace and joy again.
0.152	On the other side, it often seems to be necessary for the party wronged.
0.153	You will remember a case I cited not long ago, of Dr. Hopkins, whose deep and wholehearted confessions were the means of converting his wicked brother-in-law.
0.154	Confessions will often do what nothing else can.
0.155	They often serve to show wicked men that Christians are in spirit utterly unlike themselves.
0.156	They are aware that they do not confess their faults like this—that they know nothing of such brokenness of spirit.
0.157	Hence the confessions of a humble Christian reach their conscience as nothing else can.
0.158	I have often known men to scatter conviction like fire through a congregation by a simple confession of their own sins.
0.159	I now remember the case of a minister who, by a confession to his people, set in motion a glorious revival.
0.160	He had been to Rome during the great revival there, and had become deeply convicted of his great guilt in having cared so little for the salvation of his people.
0.161	He returned home and prepared a sermon for his people, but when he entered the pulpit the next Sabbath, he could not preach it.
0.162	His heart was full and ready to burst, and he told the people that he could not preach a word.
0.163	“Oh,” he said, “I have been among you so many years, and alas! how little I have cared for your souls!
0.164	I have tried to please you, and have carried out my regular duties in a manner all too heartless; but ah, my guilt in having so neglected the salvation of your dying souls!”
0.165	Well, he had scarcely begun to confess in this way before the deacon wanted to confess, and then other members of the church, and that house became another Bochim.
0.166	The Lord was there, and His work moved on with power.
0.167	You can readily see the effect of that minister’s confession.
0.168	Everyone said, “If our minister has sins to confess, so do we!
0.169	If he has reason to confess with such contrition and bitter weeping, how much more reason do we have!”
0.170	So his confessions accomplished what no sermon of his ever did.
0.171	Again, sincere confessions are highly honorable to the one who makes them.
0.172	There is perhaps no other way in which men show more strongly their earnest and sincere approval of the right.
0.173	It is surely no small testimony to the integrity of a man’s character if he shows that he approves the right so fully and strongly that he does not shrink for a moment from condemning himself for any known departure from it.
0.174	His love of right prevails over his pride of character.
0.175	This man’s confessions are a noble testimony to his deep sincerity of heart.
0.176	How strange it is that men should be ashamed to confess their sins!
0.177	They could not make this great mistake if they did not “put darkness for light and light for darkness.”
0.178	Is it not most honorable for a man who has done wrong to make restitution—for a man who has sinned to make a full and free confession?
0.179	How strange that men should be afraid to confess!
0.180	They might as well be ashamed to show their honesty—ashamed to let the world see that they approve the right more than they value an undeserved reputation—a reputation for being what they are not.
0.181	Confessions serve to unburden the mind of the injured man and lead him to exercise forgiveness.
0.182	Injuries inflicted, especially by professing Christians, often become great snares and temptations.
0.183	Many are overcome by them and fall into a bad state of mind, in which divine truth and grace seem to have no good influence on their hearts.
0.184	They know, perhaps, that it is wrong for them to indulge such feelings, but they have been badly abused, they say—and by a professing Christian, too—and they do not find it easy to rid their minds of the impression thus made.
0.185	Now in such cases, an honest confession by the offending party is the natural remedy.
0.186	It usually does more to remove that dreadful stumbling block than anything, or everything, else.
0.187	Christian reader, is any sinner stumbling in this way over any sin of yours?
0.188	Take care that you do not ensnare his soul to his ruin.
0.189	Take care that the blood of his murdered soul is not found on your skirts!
0.190	I have sometimes known one man to provoke another until he had made him angry, and then reproach him for this very anger, instead of reproaching himself for having caused it.
0.191	This is cruelly wicked.
0.192	The man who has thus provoked another to anger ought to humble himself in the most thorough confession, and say, “I have most meanly tempted you to sin, and then reproached you for yielding to my temptation—when I ought to have reproached myself most.
0.193	I am sorry. I deplore and condemn my own wickedness.”
0.194	You may perhaps remember a case in which it is said that a man who was opposing Wesley’s views of sanctification, and who wanted to prove that a certain believer in those views was not perfectly sanctified, went and took a washbowl of filthy water and threw it in his face.
0.195	Now let us suppose that the injured man took offense and got angry, and seeing this, the offending party exults and says, “Fine sanctification this—to get angry at so slight a provocation!”
0.196	But notice how unspeakably mean and wicked is the course of this tempter to sin.
0.197	Let him break down and confess his own sin with shame.
0.198	Let him say, “I have been the guilty wretch in this matter!”
0.199	Let him do this, and repentance would flow freely from both their hearts.
0.200	Again, confession tends strongly to secure the prayers of those against whom you have sinned and to whom you confess.
0.201	Nothing tends more strongly to awaken at once the spirit of prayer on your behalf.
0.202	How naturally they cry out, “O Lord, forgive the man, for he confesses his wrong; forgive all his sins and show him the light of Your face.”
0.203	The confession of our besetting sins to others than an injured party, for the purpose of getting help to overcome them, is exceedingly useful.
0.204	It usually interests our Christian brethren very much on our behalf.
0.205	Who does not know how powerfully the heart is drawn out to pray for those who confess their besetting sins in this way?
0.206	Have you not had some experience of this?
0.207	IV. What is meant by praying one for another is easily understood in this connection.
0.208	It implies that we take a deep interest in the spiritual welfare of those who confess their faults, and use our influence with God to secure their pardon.
0.209	It is as if we were to sign a petition for their release from the sentence of a broken law.
0.210	Suppose your neighbor has broken the law of the State and, being convicted, is sent to the State prison for life; but he repents most deeply—gives evidence that he is a changed man—and now a petition for his pardon is laid before you for your signature.
0.211	Will you join in the prayer?
0.212	Will you say, “Does he confess his sin?
0.213	If he does, I can pray for his pardon.”
0.214	So when men confess their sins to God and to men, you should pray God to forgive them.
0.215	God requires you to do it.
0.216	V. Obedience to this requirement implies a real spirit of forgiveness—a desire that God should forgive, and an expression of this desire in real prayer to God.
0.217	This is too obvious to need illustration.
0.218	Where besetting sins are confessed, it is implied that we take an interest in their sanctification and pray earnestly to God for this great result.
H:0.52	Remarks.
0.219	1. Wrongs committed against the public should be confessed publicly.
0.220	Of this no one can have any doubt.
0.221	If confession should be made at all, it should be made to those against whom the sin is committed.
0.222	2. Wrongs against individuals may be committed either publicly or privately, and in either case the confession should correspond to the manner and publicity of the offense.
0.223	If any man injures another in public estimation by writing a libel against him, or preaching a libel against him, the sin is public, and clearly the confession of it should be as extensive as the offense.
0.224	You are bound to make the retraction as broad as the wrong done, if you can.
0.225	3. You may see why many people never overcome their besetting sins.
0.226	They are never humble and candid enough to confess them and pour out their hearts before their brethren, so as to secure their sympathy and prayers on their own behalf.
0.227	They never take advantage of the great moral lever that confession puts under a man’s giant sins to dig them up and roll them out and away forever.
0.228	4. You may see the error of supposing that it is enough to confess to God, and that confession to man is useless and not required.
0.229	The Catholic doctrine of confession has driven many Protestants to the opposite extreme, so that many churches are opposed to having any confessions at all made before men.
0.230	But it does not follow at all that because Catholics have abused the doctrine of confession, it should therefore be cast away altogether.
0.231	It does not follow that we are not under obligation to confess to those whom we have injured.
0.232	By no means. If this principle were a just one, we should soon lose all our Bibles.
0.233	5. I have often known people to labor a long time under a load of sins unknown to others—sins which there might have been no need to confess, but for their great pride.
0.234	But God saw that their pride must be humbled, and He could not give peace to their souls until it was.
0.235	Now let such a man go to those whose good opinion he values most and confess his sins; let him truly take up his cross in this matter and not spare his proud heart at all—he will find it a most excellent antidote.
0.236	I have often seen this done.
0.237	A man goes to some person whom he esteems very highly and says, “I am ensnared by my pride—it is dragging me away from God, down to hell, and I am determined it shall be subdued.”
0.238	So he pours out his confession of sin.
0.239	Now this is seizing the great club to crush the serpent’s head—the head of cursed pride—and it is commonly successful.
0.240	People in this situation will often find confession quite indispensable.
0.241	6. When in a case of personal fault both parties are to blame, one should never wait for the other to begin the confessions.
0.242	Let each hasten to be most hearty and full in his own confession—then a right spirit will prevail, and each will spur the other on to good.
0.243	It often happens that one holds back for fear the other will make bad use of his confessions.
0.244	No matter if he does.
0.245	I mean, comparatively speaking, it is no matter worth a moment’s regard.
0.246	It is infinitely more important that you do what is right before God, the world, and the man you have injured, than that you withhold confession to prevent him from abusing it.
0.247	Besides this, there is little danger of his doing so.
0.248	If he does, the responsibility is his alone.
0.249	In a case of this sort I once knew a man who said, “I will confess my wrong, and if my neighbor does not choose to confess his, or chooses to make bad use of what I confess, he must bear the responsibility alone.”
0.250	He poured out his confessions like water, found sweet relief and peace of soul, and soon afterward died; that neighbor and every enemy he had mourned over his ashes in bitterness, and confessed that there had lived at least one good man.
0.251	I have known the case of a church involved in great difficulty, its members pitted against each other with strong prejudices and party feelings; but eventually the spirit of confession began to prevail; each man felt himself more to blame than his neighbor, and now the only contest was to see who would confess first and most.
0.252	The dispute now was not for each to prove that his neighbor was at fault, but that he himself had been the chief sinner and had been the great cause both of his own sins and of his neighbor’s.
0.253	Every man was ready to take his hand off his neighbor and lay it on himself.
0.254	This was good. If you could have seen those humbled, confessing Christians, you would have said, “It is good to come down and get the spirit of confession.”
0.255	In such circumstances mutual confession seems to be the only thing that can save Christian character and save the church.
0.256	When men have done wrong they must come down and confess their faults one to another.
0.257	To see two brethren meet in the spirit of mutual confession, forgiveness, and prayer is a blessed sight.
0.258	God rejoices in it, and every holy angel strikes a fresh note of joy and praise in heaven.
0.259	It is one of the loveliest scenes ever known on earth.
0.260	Prayer offered in such circumstances is especially effective.
0.261	Suppose you had been wronged—the wrongdoer is prosecuted, convicted, and sentenced—but in the course of time he becomes penitent, you are ready to forgive him, and you send up your petition to the Executive for his pardon.
0.262	Now who does not know that your name will carry ten times more weight because of your particular relation to that crime?
0.263	So it was in the case of Job and his three friends.
0.264	They had spoken unkindly of him, and there was good reason for them to ask his forgiveness.
0.265	God’s wrath was kindled against them. What did He say?
0.266	“Go,” He said, “to My servant Job—My servant Job shall pray for you, for him I will accept.”
0.267	They had accused Job of being a hypocrite.
0.268	Now let them make up the matter with Job and obtain his intercession with the Lord on their behalf, and they can be forgiven.
0.269	He, above all others, is the man to pray for them.
0.270	God can hear him.
0.271	Have you wronged a brother?
0.272	Go, make your confession to him, and beg his prayers on your behalf.
0.273	He is the man to pray for you.
0.274	God can hear him.
0.275	Humble yourself at his feet until he can feel a spirit of faith to pray for you; then you may hope for prayer that will avail before the Lord.
0.276	“Oh,” said a dying slaveholder, “how can I die here on my bed and have no prayer offered up for my guilty soul?”
0.277	“What shall I do?” said his sympathizing wife. “Shall I send for the minister?”
0.278	“No, no,” said the dying man; “send for my slave Tom.
0.279	I have heard him pray in my barn many a time—send for him.”
0.280	Tom came softly in, tucked his hat under his arm, and walked toward the bed: “What does Master want?”
0.281	“I want you, Tom, to pray for your dying master. I have wronged you and robbed you of your liberty these many years; I am sorry—oh, if I could live to reward you—but if you can pray for a poor lost sinner, do pray!”
0.282	And who would not rather have the prayers of the man he had enslaved and wronged than the prayers of all other men on earth?
0.283	Such a prayer is worth a world of other prayers!
0.284	But how can you have it without confession?
