0.1	"God so loved the world that he gave his only begotten Son, so that whoever believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life." —John 3:16
0.2	The term world as used here does not mean the globe of earth on which we live, but the human race.
0.3	The term is often used in this sense.
0.4	The world, the whole world—these are terms often used to signify the people who live in the world, the human race as such.
0.5	The term perish in this passage does not mean annihilation; it is clearly set in contrast to everlasting life, as its opposite.
0.6	Everlasting life, as the term is used here, is not merely everlasting existence—I do not know that the term is ever used in that sense in any other part of the Bible: whether everlasting existence will be a blessing or not will depend on the state in which individuals exist, whether in happiness or misery.
0.7	Under some circumstances everlasting existence might be anything but a blessing.
0.8	This everlasting life spoken of here is no doubt an everlasting living with God in heaven—an everlasting existence combined with everlasting happiness; this is the eternal life so often spoken of in the Scriptures, and, no doubt, it is what is meant in this place.
0.9	Now to perish is the opposite of this; it is not annihilation or a mere ceasing to exist, because to be annihilated would often be no evil to the individual on whom the sentence was inflicted; to a wretched being it would not be an evil at all, but a great favor.
0.10	In short, it is very plain that to perish is the very opposite of everlasting life, and means what is expressed by everlasting death, or a state of endless punishment.
0.11	In speaking from these words I propose to consider—
0.12	I. The Object of This Love.
0.13	II. Its Nature.
0.14	III. The Reasons Why This Love Resorted to Such a Measure as Giving the Only Begotten Son of God for Men.
0.15	IV. The Nature and Necessity of the Faith That Can Secure This Great End—the Salvation of the Soul.
0.16	I. The Object of This Love.
0.17	The object of this love is the world—not a part of it, but the world.
0.18	There is no reason in the nature of things why one part of mankind should be loved more than another part, because, note well, this love was not exercised toward saints as such, and had no regard to the character of the people of the world; rather, it was toward a world of sinners that this love was exercised.
0.19	God loved men as a race, as sinners, the enemies of God.
0.20	Now there was no reason why part of the race of sinners should be loved, and not all of them; and the same kind of love that could possibly love a part of mankind must, by necessity and from its very nature, love the whole of them—this is the only love, a universal love, that could have been exercised toward man by a good being.
0.21	But this leads me to inquire, in the next place, into—
H:0.9	II. The Nature of This Love.
0.22	And first, I observe that it could not have been a love of approval, or a delight in the character of men, for there was nothing in the character of the human race that could allow God to love them, or take any delight in their character—that is most certain.
0.23	It is impossible that God should have loved mankind with an approving love; for that would have made him infinitely more wicked than they were themselves.
0.24	What does it imply to love a wicked being?
0.25	Why, it implies sympathy with his character: God could not have loved them with an approving love without being infinitely more wicked than they, because for an infinite being to sympathize with wicked natures he must himself be infinitely wicked.
0.26	It is certain that this love could not have had any regard to the character of men—they were not loved for their character; it is impossible that it should have been so.
0.27	But I remark again, this love could not have been mere emotion, for emotion does not influence the life apart from the will; emotion is not a cause; it will not bring anything into existence—even intense emotion will not; it is a merely involuntary state of mind—something that belongs to the passions; it will often be a motive to action, and may be a stimulus to the will, but mere passion never caused anything; causality is that which produces, and it lives in the will of every moral agent, and is a very different thing from emotion.
0.28	Again, it was not fondness for particular persons.
0.29	There was no reason in God's nature, and no reason in man, why God should exercise any such fondness.
0.30	I remark again that it was not an involuntary love, as is evident from what it did.
0.31	It must have been voluntary, because we have here before us the evidence of its effectiveness; and it was an effective love because it was a voluntary love.
0.32	Again, it was not an unreasonable state of mind.
0.33	There was, to be sure, nothing in the character of man that would allow for an approving love, yet it was not an unreasonable state of mind at all; it was not something forbidden by reason.
0.34	We sometimes see affections among men that are wholly unreasonable.
0.35	We sometimes see deep affection, in the form of what we call love, existing among people in a way that is totally contrary to reason.
0.36	But there was some good reason for this love of God—something that his own understanding and conscience approved.
0.37	There was something about men that made it reasonable for God to love them with a certain kind of love.
0.38	I remark again that the love God actually did show was the only kind of love that could have been of importance to man.
0.39	If the love of God had been mere emotion, or pity, it would have done man no good.
0.40	This love, then, must have been a reasonable affection; it must have been a reasonable love.
0.41	Now when we look at the nature of this love, if we do so in a simple and reasonable manner, there can be no doubt about what its real nature is.
0.42	I observe that it was good will, or benevolence.
0.43	This is evident from the fact that it exerted itself for the good of its objects in a most striking and wonderful manner.
0.44	It is plain that it was good will, because it produced good action.
0.45	Again, it was an unselfish kind of love.
0.46	The reason God loved men was not that they deserved for him to do them good—for they deserved only evil at his hands.
0.47	Note well, there was a good reason why he should love them, but they had no right to demand his love as a matter of justice, for they had forfeited all claim to his affection or protection; and therefore, of course, justice did not demand that God should do them good.
0.48	But let me say once more, the soul of man was so valuable, its happiness would be so infinitely important, and its misery so great an evil, that God, looking at the intrinsic value of their souls, saw good reason for loving them and doing them good—that is, God did the good for the sake of the good itself; he willed good to them for the sake of the intrinsic and infinite value of this good to them, considered in itself, and not because they deserved it at all.
0.49	They not only had no claim on him for this love, but there were great reasons for his destroying them; yet, nevertheless, so great was the value of their souls, so much did he pity them in view of their coming and certain destruction, and so greatly did he love their happiness and desire it, that, overcoming all obstacles in the way, he rose above any inclination to punish them or retaliate against them for their wickedness, and sought only to do them good.
0.50	There was good reason for this, as I have said—not in view of the actions of mankind, but in consideration of the value of their souls.
0.51	I remark once more that this love was a disinterested love; I mean that he did not set before himself any interest of his own merely as the reason why he should do this thing—it was the love of the world—it was a disposition to do them good; it was the love of their good that led him to do it.
0.52	He did not propose to benefit them in any such sense as to secure for himself, in any selfish sense, some great good—it was a totally disinterested love.
0.53	As a matter of fact he did enjoy it himself, and yet it was a totally disinterested love, and all the more will it glorify him.
0.54	Just in proportion as he aimed to secure their interest with singleness of purpose, in just that proportion did he secure his own approval and the admiration and glorification of all holy beings.
0.55	By disinterested love I do not mean that he had no interest in it, for he had an infinite interest in what he did; but I mean that his love was wholly unselfish—he sought to do good because of the value of the good itself.
0.56	But let me say again: this must have been a love of amazing strength; it could not have been a feeble state of mind; it must have been infinitely intense!
0.57	Just think of it!
0.58	"For God so loved the world that he gave his only begotten Son!"
0.59	What a wonder that was!
0.60	Here, on the one hand, was a world of enemies who were at war with him; and on the other stood his beloved Son, his only begotten, his well-beloved Son.
0.61	Now just look at this, and conceive of a state of mind that would prefer to give that Son, that only begotten, that well-beloved Son, to die for those rebels who stood with the weapons of rebellion in their hands.
0.62	They had revolted against his government, and were deserving of his frown and his wrath, his own conscience clearly affirming that they deserved to be banished from his presence; yet such was his estimate of the value of their souls, and of the dreadful suffering to which they would be subjected if the penalty of the law were inflicted on them, that he gave his Son rather than banish that world of rebels from the glory of his power to die in their guilty state.
0.63	No one, unless he ponders these things well, will understand how intensely strong this love must have been to produce such a determination as that.
0.64	Let a parent who has an only child conceive, if he can—a child who has never offended him, the very darling of his soul, one whom he loves as much as he loves himself and has reason to love—whether he could give up that child for the good of his enemies.
0.65	Let people abuse him, do everything they possibly could to injure him, placing themselves in a position as offensive as possible so as to deserve his indignation and condemnation, and incur his utter rejection and his abhorrence of them forever.
0.66	Now conceive of a state of mind that could deliberately make such a choice as God did.
0.67	It was not the sacrifice of an innocent person in place of the guilty; it was not the punishment of Christ—consenting that Christ should suffer instead of sinners being punished—no; there was no such idea in the divine mind.
0.68	But we shall inquire more fully later on into the reasons why God gave his Son to die for the good of the world.
0.69	I am now speaking of the intense nature of this love.
0.70	Now think, if you can, with your son on one side and your enemies on the other, what struggles would arise in your mind as you reflected on the fact that these enemies must perish forever or you must give up your son!
0.71	You see that he has a willing heart, that he is ready to undertake their deliverance from death—that he is willing to take on all that is implied in being their Savior; but it requires that you consent to it, that you enter into it with your heart, and that you say to him, Go.
0.72	Now when we realize what God must have felt under such circumstances, it is easy enough for us to understand the intense nature of the love that could overcome that state of mind which would naturally cling to his Son, and give him up for the good of the world.
0.73	Just consider how many things there must have been against this.
0.74	God knew what it would cost him, that his Son must pass through trial, through affliction, through persecution, through poverty, through agony.
0.75	His Father saw every trial and every suffering that he would have to undergo—he saw him heavy with sorrow and despised—he saw him, too, in the garden, when he sweated, as it were, great drops of blood, so great was his agony—all this was present to the divine mind when he gave up his Son to be the Savior of the world.
0.76	The Father saw his Son weary to the point of fainting as he carried his cross up Calvary's hill, so that his barbarous persecutors were compelled to lay the burden on another.
0.77	He saw him mocked and pierced when on the cross, and saw him in the agonies of death, and heard his mournful cry, "My God, my God, why have you forsaken me?"
0.78	What a number of scenes must have crowded in upon the divine mind to forbid the gift of his Son for the salvation of a guilty world.
0.79	Yet so great was his love that he overcame all these obstacles and freely gave him up for us all, so that we might not perish but have everlasting life.
0.80	Let this idea, dear hearers, take possession of your minds.
0.81	I must not enlarge on this, however, but proceed to say that it must never be forgotten or left out of view that it was the love of enemies, not of friends; for, note well, all the world was in view, and it was as sinners that God gave Christ to die for them—they were a race of sinners.
0.82	Note well, it was not for a single Christian, as such, that God gave his Son; it was for sinners as such, for rebels as such; it was in view of the fact that they were sinners that God gave his Son.
0.83	Now it is very important that this fact always be kept in mind: that it was not for good but for bad people, not for the righteous but for the wicked, that God gave his Son.
0.84	Again, it was a forbearing love.
0.85	Some people seem to think that when we speak of the self-denial of God we imply that he is sometimes selfish.
0.86	Now let me say, self-denial always implies the very opposite of selfishness in any being; it is consenting to give up some good, or to endure some evil, for the benefit of others.
0.87	No individual who is living in selfishness can, of course, exercise self-denial.
0.88	Now this was self-denial in God, to consent to deny himself by giving up his Son; it must have been greatly trying to his feelings for him to consent to give up his Son to die for the world.
0.89	But I must not enlarge on this.
0.90	Let me say again: it was, of course, a universal love.
0.91	It was not love for men alone; it extended to other worlds.
0.92	And no doubt it was, in great measure, with reference to other worlds that he was led to take the course he did take in forgiving sin in this world.
0.93	It was the good of his universal kingdom that led him to take this particular measure.
0.94	Again, his love was a holy love; it hated sin.
0.95	Since this love was exercised toward sinners, it was very important that something should be done to make the whole universe understand that, although it was the love of sinners as such, it was not connivance at their sin.
0.96	Indeed, this was the grand and most essential point, as every man can see: since his love was a love shown to sinners, how he should sufficiently guard against the impression that he connived at their sins; for, note well, he was going to express great love for sinners by devoting himself to doing them good.
0.97	Now, mark this: how shall it be known that he was as much opposed to their sin as he had professed to be, and as the universal conscience demanded that he should be?
0.98	It is often a delicate thing for human rulers to show love and benevolence to those who are rebels against the government.
0.99	It is a very delicate thing for the governments of great and extensive empires to show deep and anxious love for those who are enemies of the law and who defy it.
0.100	There is also much danger that the justice of the law will be thrown into the shade, that respect for the law will be lost sight of, and that the sin involved in the rebellion will be forgotten.
0.101	Now there was infinite danger of this in the government of God; therefore it was necessary that, while pardoning the sinner, he should as much as possible show his opposition to sin, and so make it plain to the world that he did not connive at their sin.
0.102	But again, this love was just as truly as it was merciful; that is, it was just to the universe.
0.103	There were other interests in his government besides the interest of sinners.
0.104	There were reasons why he should not endanger his authority and lower respect for his law.
0.105	Now it is easy to see that justice to the universe demanded that he be careful how he expressed the great and infinite love he had in his heart toward sinners.
0.106	This leads me to consider—
0.107	III. The Reasons for This Wonderful Measure of the Divine Government.
0.108	His love, note well, sought to accomplish the world's salvation—he sought to save those who deserved to die, and we are told that he resorted to this measure of giving his only begotten Son for sinners—a wonderful measure indeed!
0.109	Now it is plain that the reason for this must have been anything but ill will on the part of God.
0.110	Again, it was anything but anger at them that led him to do it.
0.111	To be sure, from one point of view, he had a holy indignation at their sins; but it was not this anger that led him to give his Son—he gave him in spite of this just and holy indignation at their sins.
0.112	It was not God's anger, then, but a merciful disposition that led God to require Christ to die for sinners.
0.113	God was disposed to be merciful; this was the secret of the whole matter; this was the grand foundation of the whole arrangement: the very reason God undertook their salvation was that he loved them, and was disposed to show them favor.
0.114	It was not, then, I say, the lack of a merciful disposition; it was not hatred, but love of sinners—the one great reason that led God to show mercy to men.
0.115	There was one great reason in the divine mind, the fundamental reason: his love for sinners.
0.116	Now mark this: it is said that God resorted to this measure of giving his Son to secure the good of the world—for several reasons, which I will name, he did not retaliate against them for all their opposition to him.
0.117	Now observe, there must have been some very weighty reasons, and some reasons that needed to be overcome, but which could not be overcome by any measure other than the one that was actually adopted.
0.118	We ought always to understand that God acts rationally, and for wise and good reasons.
0.119	Let no one, therefore, suppose that he resorted to any unnecessary measure of severity.
0.120	No one can rationally suppose that God resorted to any means that could have been avoided in the nature of the case.
0.121	Now he had set his heart on the means—wise means, and means that were demanded by the circumstances and the occasion.
0.122	Who can believe that any other means were resorted to?
0.123	But let us look at the reasons for the particular measure that was taken.
0.124	It is of very great importance to understand them.
0.125	We have seen that God had a good reason for the measure he adopted—a sufficient reason, and a reason that could not have been set aside or overcome; but let us now find out, if we can, what these reasons were.
0.126	Whatever they were, they must have been approved by the law of benevolence, or they could not have been virtue.
0.127	If the measure had not been one approved by the eternal laws of God's own reason, he never could have resorted to it.
0.128	But the fact is, it is simple enough, and it does not require any great learning to understand it: it only needs to be looked at, and everyone can see at once that such circumstances called for such a measure.
0.129	Look at the subject—mankind had resisted the government of God, and had denied the justice of his law, to which even the angels conform, and which is absolutely necessary to secure the well-being of the universe and their own salvation.
0.130	Now if God had seemed to connive at man's disobedience of his law, which was the law of the entire universe, all other beings might have denied the justice of the law and disobeyed it also.
0.131	Observe, therefore, that the whole universe, all the inhabitants of heaven, had a strong interest in maintaining this law.
0.132	Now mark this! This law had been disobeyed; a public lie had been told and persisted in; the justice of the law had been denied in a most deliberate manner.
0.133	Now what was to be done?
0.134	It is evident that something must be done that could not be construed as connivance at this rebellion.
0.135	Now observe the relations between man and God.
0.136	God's law had been trampled underfoot, and the universe had its eye on God to see what he would do—the well-being of the whole depended on it.
0.137	His relation to the universe required of him either to execute the law or to make a demonstration on his own part, from his own heart—for it was his estimation of the law that the universe needed.
0.138	It was for him to act, and everything depended on the course he took.
0.139	It is easy to see that the honor of the law might be fully upheld by God himself, if he should show before the whole universe his approval of the law and of the public good—and such a demonstration as this would serve the same end as the execution of the law on the offenders.
0.140	If God would take upon himself human nature, and in this nature of both God and man would stand right out before the whole universe and yield obedience to its precepts, this would be as high an evidence of his regard for the law as he could possibly give in any way whatever.
0.141	By taking upon himself the nature of the violators of the law, and in that nature obeying the precept and suffering the penalty, the demonstration would be complete and the law perfectly honored.
0.142	Now suppose that Christ, his eternal Son, should in this way stand forth as the representative of the race of rebels, having no sin in himself, and yet standing in such a position as if the sin of the whole race were summed up in him and the whole rebellion centered in him; it is easy to see that God could pardon the sinners and yet honor the law.
0.143	Mark this! He stands as the representative of the world, as the representative of sin, and it is easy to see that this arrangement was a great deal more impressive than the execution of the law on the rebels themselves would have been.
0.144	The lawgiver himself stands forth as an illustration of the beauty of his own law, and in vindication of its honor.
0.145	But I must not enlarge on this.
0.146	I have only to say under this head that it is perfectly easy to see the bearing of this measure on the universe itself: how perfectly it met the urgent need of the government, and made it quite safe for God to pardon the guilty.
0.147	I shall now, in the next place, make a few remarks on—
0.148	IV. The Nature of Faith.
0.149	Now observe the motive that caused God to do this thing.
0.150	I have sometimes heard people speak of the atonement of Christ, and of God's motive, in such a manner as to show that if they believed God had any such motive as they ascribed to him, it was quite impossible for them to have any respect for him.
0.151	They speak of the atonement as not coming from a merciful disposition in God, but as the exacting of a debt; that God required a certain amount of payment for every sinner before he would forgive; that it was not the result of a merciful disposition.
0.152	Now I say that if anyone believes this, he cannot even have respect for the character of God.
0.153	Now we are taught that God gave his Son to die for men as sinners, and out of love for them, and that they receive the blessing as the result of exercising faith in Christ.
0.154	It is that which gives it all its power.
0.155	Only let a sinner understand that God loves him as a sinner, and if there is anything that can break his heart, that will.
0.156	I do not mean to say that a knowledge of this fact will invariably do it; but I do say that if this does not, nothing will.
0.157	In short, the declaration of love to sinners must be realized and believed by them in order for them to be saved.
0.158	A few remarks must close what I have to say.
0.159	First, many people overlook the nature of this love because they cannot conceive how God can love sinners.
0.160	I know this from my own experience, for I stumbled at this point for a long time.
0.161	I had not experienced benevolent love at all.
0.162	I had exercised love: I knew what the term meant in some of its senses.
0.163	I knew what it was to take delight in those whose characters I admired; and I knew what the love of fondness meant as it exists among selfish beings; but, note well, this was the only kind of love I had exercised, and therefore I could not understand how God could love a wicked man: it seemed to me impossible that God should love a sinner.
0.164	I said to myself, If God can love a sinner, he must himself be a sinner; and do you think that God can be a sinner?
0.165	Now you see, I judged God by my selfish love.
0.166	The love that I exercised implied some fellowship and sympathy with the one loved.
0.167	At last I was enabled to understand that God could love men without exercising a selfish love.
0.168	A great many people speak very loosely on this subject; they do not understand the nature of God's love for sinners—the selfish mind cannot.
0.169	When a sinner first becomes convicted of sin, he thinks it is perfectly impossible for God to love him, and is ready to exclaim, He cannot love me any more than he can love the devil.
0.170	And in part that is true.
0.171	He cannot love the sinner with an approving and sympathizing love any more than he can the devil—not a bit more.
0.172	But there is another view of this subject, which it is very important for you to take, sinner; there is a kind of love to which you are a stranger—the love of your enemies.
0.173	Oh, you say, what reason have I to love them?
0.174	Why, you have the same reason to love them that God has—exactly!
0.175	God does not love with an approving love, which implies sympathy with their characters; but do not be mistaken, sinner, he can love you with a love of which you have no conception.
0.176	Now the kind of love that God will exercise is just the kind that you ought to exercise toward your enemies; and in order to receive this love you must rise entirely above your selfishness, and give yourselves up with hearty good will to seek their good.
0.177	Now the fact is that, because you have never exercised this love, you cannot understand its nature.
0.178	But God can rise above—ah, he never was in the selfish mire that your soul is in.
0.179	He is not filled with the spirit of retaliation that you feel—and therefore, although he sees and knows all the guilt of the sinner, he can still look upon him with compassion, and devote himself with all his heart to saving him.
0.180	But let me say once more: the fact is, sinners mistake the nature of God's love, and so they try to make themselves happy.
0.181	They always suppose that they must do something to deserve his love; you ask them to come to Christ, and they say, I must do more; I must become better; I must pray; I must do this thing or the other thing to deserve his love.
0.182	They have, you see, the idea of approving love; they must deserve it before they have it—they want to feel that they deserve it.
0.183	The sinner will never believe that God loves him as a sinner.
0.184	But let me tell you, sinner, that this is all wrong; you can never deserve God's love in the sense in which you hope to possess it—and if you seek to deserve it in that way, you will never be saved.
0.185	But remember, it was as a sinner that Christ died for you!
0.186	It was as a rebel that God gave his Son to die for you!
0.187	Just as you are in your sins, God loves you, and for you, just in that state, he gave his Son to die for you.
0.188	This is what you must believe.
0.189	You will find it difficult to believe, but it is absolutely necessary that you do so.
0.190	Let me urge you to let this idea take full possession of your minds, and say to yourself, What need is there, then, to try to make myself deserving, if God loves me now just as I am?
0.191	It was as I am that Christ died for me; it was as a sinner that God loved me, and loves me still; as a sinner, then, I will go to Jesus, as I am, as a humble penitent—a seeking, but not a deserving, sinner.
0.192	Will you come? Will you come now?
0.193	Will you believe now? Or will you make God a liar?
