0.1	Amos 3:3 — “Can two walk together unless they are agreed?”
0.2	In the Holy Scriptures we often find a negative statement cast in the form of a question.
0.3	The text is an instance of this kind, so that we are to understand the prophet as affirming that two cannot walk together unless they are agreed.
0.4	For two to be agreed implies something more than to be agreed in theory, or in understanding; for we often see persons who agree in theory but who differ vastly in feeling and practice.
0.5	Their understandings may embrace the same truths, while their hearts and practice are very differently affected by them.
0.6	Saints and sinners often embrace in theory the same religious creed, while it is plain that they differ widely in feeling and practice.
0.7	We have reason to believe that holy angels and devils perceive and embrace intellectually the same truths, and yet how very differently they are affected by them!
0.8	These different effects, produced in different minds by the same truths, are due to the different state of the heart, or affections, of the different individuals.
0.9	Or, in other words, the difference in the effect consists in the different manner in which each person receives these truths, or feels and acts in view of them.
0.10	It is to be observed also that the same things and truths will affect the same mind very differently at different times.
0.11	This, too, is due to the different state of the affections at those times.
0.12	Or rather, this difference consists in the different manner in which the mind acts at those times.
0.13	All pleasure and pain—all happiness and misery—all sin and holiness—have their seat in, and belong to, the heart or affections.
0.14	All the satisfaction or dissatisfaction, pain or pleasure, that we feel in view of any truth or thing presented to our minds depends entirely upon the state of our affections at the time, and consists in these affections.
0.15	If it falls in with, and excites, and feeds pleasurable affections, we are naturally pleased; for our pleasure or happiness consists in these pleasurable affections.
0.16	The higher, therefore, these affections are raised by the presentation of anything or any truth to our minds, the greater our pleasure is.
0.17	But if the thing or truth does not fall in with our affections, it cannot please us; if it lies outside our present state of feeling, and we refuse to change the course of our feelings, we shall either view it with indifference, our affections being otherwise engaged, or, if it presses upon us, we shall turn from it and resist it.
0.18	If it is not only outside the subject that now engages our affections but opposed to it, we shall and must (so long as our affections remain the same) resist and oppose it.
0.19	We not only feel uninterested, or displeased and disgusted, when a subject different from the one that presently engages our affections is introduced and crowded upon us; but if anything, even on the same subject, is presented that is far above or below our tone of feeling, and if our affections remain the same, and we refuse to be enlisted and brought to that point, we must feel uninterested, and perhaps grieved and offended.
0.20	If the subject is shown in a light that is below our present tone of feeling, we cannot be interested until it comes up to our feelings; and if the subject is held up before our mind in this cooling and, to us, degraded point of view, while we struggle to maintain these high affections, we feel displeased, because our affections are not fed but opposed.
0.21	If the subject is presented in a manner that strikes far above our tone of feeling, and our affections grovel and refuse to rise, it does not fall in with and feed our affections, and therefore we cannot be interested; it is fanaticism to us; we are displeased with the warmth in which we do not choose to share, and the farther it is above our temperature, the more we are disgusted.
0.22	These are truths to which every man’s experience will testify, for they hold good on every subject and under all circumstances, and are founded on principles built into the very nature of man.
0.23	Present to the ardent politician his favorite subject in his favorite light, and when it has engaged his affections, touch it with the fire of eloquence, make it burn and blaze before his mind, and you delight him greatly.
0.24	But change your style and tone—let down your fire and feeling—turn the subject over—present it in a drier light—and at once he loses nearly all his interest and becomes uneasy at the descent.
0.25	Now change the subject—introduce death and solemn judgment—and he is shocked and stunned; press him with them, and he is disgusted and offended.
0.26	Now, this loss of interest in his favorite subject is the natural consequence of taking away from before his mind that burning view of it that poured fire through his affections; and the disgust he feels at the change of subject is the natural consequence of presenting something that was, at the time, directly opposed to the state of his feelings.
0.27	Unless he chooses to turn his mind as you change the subject, he cannot help being displeased.
0.28	A refined musician is listening almost in rapture to the skillful performance of a fine piece of harmony.
0.29	Throw discords at him, and he is in pain in a moment.
0.30	Increase and prolong the dissonance, and he leaves the room in disgust.
0.31	You are fond of music; but you are at present melancholy—you are in great affliction—you are inclined to weep—the plaintive tones of an Aeolian harp fall softly upon your ear and melt around your heart—your tears flow fast—but now the din of trumpets, drums, and cymbals, and the piercing fife in merry quicksteps, breaks upon your ear and drowns the soft breathings of the harp—you feel distressed—you turn away and stop your ears.
0.32	The plaintive harp touched you at a tender point; it fell in with your feelings; therefore you were gratified.
0.33	The martial music opposed your state of feeling; you were too melancholy to have your affections raised and enlivened by it; it therefore necessarily distressed you.
0.34	Your heart is glowing with religious feelings—you are not only averse to the introduction of any other subject at that time, but you are uninterested in anything on the same subject that is far below the tone of your affections.
0.35	Suppose you hear a cold man preach or pray; while he remains cold and you are warm with feeling, you are not interested, for your affections are not fed and cherished unless he comes up to your tone; if this does not happen, you are distressed, and perhaps disgusted with his coldness.
0.36	This is a matter of course.
0.37	Suppose, like Paul, “you have great heaviness and continual sorrow in your heart” for dying sinners; that “the Spirit helps your infirmities, making intercessions for you, according to the will of God, with groanings that cannot be uttered.” In this state of mind you hear a person pray who does not mention sinners—you hear a minister preach who says but little to them, and that in a heartless, meaningless manner; you are not interested—you cannot be, feeling as you do—but you are grieved and distressed.
0.38	Suppose you are lukewarm, and carnal and earthly in your affections; you hear someone exhort, or pray, or preach, who is highly spiritual and fervent and affectionate; if you cling to your sins and your affections will not rise; if, through prejudice, or pride, or the earthly and sensual state of your affections, you refuse to kindle and to grasp the subject, then although you admit every word he says, you are still not pleased.
0.39	He is above your temperature; you are annoyed with the manner and fire and spirit of the man.
0.40	The higher he rises, if your affections grovel, the farther apart you are, and the more you are displeased.
0.41	While your heart is wrong, the nearer right he is, the more he burns upon you; if your heart will not kindle, the more you are disgusted.
0.42	Now, in both these cases, those whose affections stand at or near the same point as the one who speaks or prays will not feel disturbed, but pleased.
0.43	Those who are lukewarm will listen to the dull man and say, “It is pretty good.”
0.44	Their pleasure will be small, because their affections are low; but on the whole they are pleased.
0.45	Those who have no affections at the time will, of course, not feel at all.
0.46	All who have much feeling will listen with grief and pain.
0.47	These would listen to the ardent man with great interest.
0.48	Let him glow and blaze, and they are in rapture.
0.49	But the carnal and cold-hearted, while they refuse to rise, are necessarily disturbed and offended by his fire.
0.50	From these remarks we may learn,
0.51	First, why persons who differ in theory on doctrinal points in religion, and who belong to different denominations, will often for a time walk together in great harmony and affection.
0.52	It is because they feel deeply, and feel alike.
0.53	Their differences are in great measure lost or forgotten while they fall in with each other’s state of feeling; they will walk together while in heart they are agreed.
0.54	Again—we see why young converts love to associate with one another, and with those older saints who have the most religious feeling; these walk together because they feel alike.
0.55	Again—we see why lukewarm professing Christians and impenitent sinners have the same difficulties with the means used in revivals of religion.
0.56	We often hear them complain about the manner of preaching and praying.
0.57	Their objections are the same; they find fault with the same things and use the same arguments in support of their objections.
0.58	The reason is that at that time their affections are nearly the same; it is the fire and the spirit that disturb their frosty hearts.
0.59	For the time being they walk together, for in feeling they are agreed.
0.60	Again—we see why ministers and Christians visiting revivals often at first raise objections to the means used, and quibble, and sometimes take sides with the wicked.
0.61	The fact is that, coming as they often do from regions where there are no religious revivals at the time, they frequently feel reproved and annoyed by the warmth and spirit they witness.
0.62	The praying, preaching, and conversation are above their present temperature.
0.63	Sometimes prejudice because it is among a denomination different from their own, or prejudice against the preacher or people, or perhaps pride, or envy, or worldliness, or something of the kind, chains down their affections so that they do not enter into the spirit of the work.
0.64	Now, while their hearts remain wrong, they will of course quibble; and the nearer right anything is—the more spiritual and holy—so much the more it must displease them while their affections grovel.
0.65	Again—we see why ministers and private Christians differ about prudential measures.
0.66	The man who sees and feels the infinitely solemn things of eternity will necessarily judge very differently of what is prudent or imprudent in the use of means from one whose spiritual eye is almost closed.
0.67	The man whose heart is breaking for perishing sinners will, of course, consider it prudent, and right, and necessary, to “use great plainness of speech,” and to deal with them in a very earnest and affectionate manner.
0.68	He would consider a contrary course highly imprudent and dangerous and criminal.
0.69	Whereas he who feels but little for them, and sees but little of their danger, will satisfy himself with using very different means, or with using them in a very different manner, and will of course hold very different notions of what is prudent.
0.70	Hence we see the same person having very different notions of prudence, and consequently acting very differently, at different times.
0.71	Indeed, a man’s notions of what is prudent as to means and measures in revivals of religion will depend, and in great measure ought to depend, on the state of his own affections and the state of feeling with which he is surrounded.
0.72	For what would be prudent under some circumstances would be highly imprudent under others.
0.73	What would be prudent in one man might be highly imprudent in another.
0.74	What would be prudent for a man in a certain state of his affections, and under certain circumstances, would be the height of imprudence for the same person in a different state of feeling and under other circumstances.
0.75	It is in most cases extremely difficult to form—and often very wrong to express publicly—an opinion condemning a measure as imprudent (when it is not condemned by the word of God), without being in a position to enter into the feelings and circumstances of the individual and the people at the time the measure was adopted.
0.76	If Christians and ministers would keep these things in mind, a great many uncharitable and censorious speeches would be avoided, and much injury to the cause of truth and righteousness would be prevented.
0.77	Again—we see why lukewarm Christians and sinners are not disturbed by dull preaching or praying.
0.78	It does not take hold of their feelings at all, and therefore it neither distresses nor offends them.
0.79	Hence we see that if, in a revival of religion, when cold and wicked hearts are disturbed by plain and pointed dealing, a dull minister is called upon and preaches to the people, the wicked and cold-hearted will praise his preaching.
0.80	This shows why, in seasons of revival, we often hear sinners and lukewarm Christians wish that their minister would preach as he used to—that he would be himself again.
0.81	The reason for this is plain: he did not use to move them, but now his fire and spirit and pointedness annoy them and disturb their carnal slumbers.
0.82	Again—we may learn here how to weigh the opinions of ministers and Christians, and our own opinions, when our affections are in a bad state.
0.83	How far does such a man approve of what was said or done?
0.84	What is his opinion as to means and measures? These and the like are questions often asked and answered, and the answer is relied upon as high authority, without any regard to the state of that man’s affections at the time.
0.85	Now, in most cases, we do utterly wrong to place much confidence in our own opinions, or in the opinions of others, as to prudential measures, unless we have evidence that our or their affections are in the right state; for it is almost certain that if our affections changed, we would view things in a different light and consequently change our opinion.
0.86	Christians would do well to remember and adopt the resolution of President Edwards, “that he would always act as he saw to be most proper when he had the clearest views of the things of religion.”
0.87	Again—we learn why churches are sometimes convulsed by revivals of religion.
0.88	In most churches there are probably a greater or smaller number of hypocrites, who, when revivals are to some degree stripped of animal feeling and become highly spiritual, are disturbed by their fire and spirit, and inwardly, and sometimes openly, oppose them.
0.89	But when only a part of the real Christians in a church awake from their slumbers and become very spiritual and heavenly, while the rest remain carnal and earthly in their affections, the church is in danger of being torn apart.
0.90	For as those who are awake become more engaged, more spiritual and active, the others, if they will not awake, will be jealous and offended; and feeling rebuked by the engagedness of others, they will quibble, and find themselves all the more displeased as those who are more spiritual rise farther above them.
0.91	The nearer the engaged ones come to a right state of feeling, the farther apart they are; and as they ascend on the scale of holy feeling, if the others will not ascend with them, the almost certain consequence will be that these will descend, until they really have no community of feeling and can no longer walk together, because they are not agreed.
0.92	This state of feeling in a church calls for great searchings of heart in all its members; and although it is greatly to be dreaded and deeply to be lamented when it exists, it is easily accounted for on these plain principles of our nature, and it is something that will sometimes happen in spite of all the wisdom of men or angels to prevent it.
0.93	Again—we see why ministers are sometimes removed from their pastorates by revivals.
0.94	It will sometimes happen, without any imprudence on the minister’s part, that many of his church and congregation will not enter into the spirit of a revival.
0.95	If his own affections are kindled, and he feels very much for his flock and for the honor of his Master, he will most assuredly press them with truth and annoy them by his spirit and pointedness and fire, until he offends them.
0.96	If they feel wrong, the more powerfully and irresistibly he forces truth upon them, so much the more, of course, unless their feelings change, he will offend them; and in the end, perhaps, he will find it advisable to leave them.
0.97	All this may happen, and be as right and necessary in a minister as it was for Paul to leave places and people when some were hardened, and contradicted, and blasphemed, and spoke evil of this Way before the multitude.
0.98	Another case may occur, where the church and people awake while the shepherd sleeps and will not awake.
0.99	This will inevitably alienate their affections from him and destroy their confidence in him.
0.100	In either of these cases, they may find themselves unable to walk together, because they are not agreed.
0.101	In the former case, let the minister obey the command of Christ and “shake off the dust of his feet as a testimony against them.”
0.102	In the latter, let the church shake off their sleepy minister; they are better off without him than with him.
0.103	“Woe to the shepherds who feed themselves!
0.104	Should not the shepherds feed the flocks?
0.105	You do not feed the flock.
0.106	Therefore, O you shepherds, hear the word of the Lord.
0.107	Thus says the Lord God: Behold, I am against the shepherds, and I will require my flock at their hand, and make them cease from feeding the flock; nor shall the shepherds feed themselves any more; for I will deliver my flock from their mouth, that they may not be food for them.”
0.108	Ezekiel 34:2, 3, 9, 10. President Edwards says—
0.109	“Though ministers preach ever so good doctrine, and are ever so painstaking and laborious in their work, yet if they show their people that they are not well disposed toward this work, but are doubtful and suspicious of it, they will very likely do their people a great deal more harm than good.
0.110	For the very character of such a great and extraordinary work of God, if their people were allowed to believe it to be his work, together with the example of other towns and what preaching they might hear occasionally, would likely have a much greater influence on the minds of their people to awaken and animate them in religion than all other labors with them.
0.111	Besides, their minister’s opinion will not only produce in them a suspicion of the work they hear of elsewhere, by which the mighty hand of God that appears in it loses its influence on their minds; but it will also tend to create a suspicion of everything of a similar nature that appears among themselves, as being something of the same disease that has become so epidemic in the land.
0.112	And what is this, in effect, but to create a suspicion of all vital religion, and to set the people to talking against it and discouraging it wherever it appears, and knocking it on the head as fast as it rises?
0.113	We who are ministers, by looking on this work from year to year with a displeased countenance, shall effectually keep the sheep from their pasture instead of doing the part of shepherds by feeding them; and our people would be a great deal better off without any settled minister at all in such a day as this.
0.114	“We who are in this sacred office need to take heed what we do and how we conduct ourselves at this time; a smaller thing in a minister will hinder the work of God than in others.
0.115	If we are very silent, or say but little about the work in our public prayers and preaching, or seem carefully to avoid speaking of it in our conversation, our people will take it to mean that we, who are their guides and to whom they are to look for spiritual instruction, are suspicious of it; and this will tend to raise the same suspicions in them; and so the consequences mentioned before will follow.
0.116	And if we, whose business above all others it is to promote the work of God, actually hinder it and stand in its way, how can we expect to share in its glorious benefits?
0.117	And by keeping others from the benefit, we shall keep them out of heaven; therefore those awful words of Christ to the Jewish teachers should be considered by us, Matthew 23:13:
0.118	‘Woe to you, for you shut up the kingdom of heaven; for you neither go in yourselves, nor do you allow those who are entering to go in.’
0.119	If we keep the sheep from their pasture, how shall we answer for it to the great Shepherd, who has bought the flock with his precious blood and has committed the care of them to us?
0.120	I would humbly ask every minister who has so long remained disaffected toward this work, and has had contemptuous thoughts of it, to consider whether he has not until now been like Michal, without any child, or at least in great measure barren and unsuccessful in his work: I pray God it may not be a perpetual barrenness, as hers was.”
0.121	Again—we may see that carnal professing Christians and sinners have no difficulty with animal feeling.
0.122	It is not uncommon in revivals of religion to hear a great deal of opposition raised to what they call animal feeling.
0.123	That much of this kind of feeling is sometimes excited in revivals of religion is not denied, nor is it strange; indeed, it is impossible that real religious affections should be excited to any considerable degree without exciting the animal sympathies and sensibilities; and to wonder at this, or to object to a revival on this account, is plainly absurd.
0.124	But in most cases it is not the animal feeling that can give offense; for so far as these feelings are concerned, there is a perfect community of feeling between saints and sinners, and between carnal and spiritual Christians.
0.125	Sinners have as much animal feeling as saints; cold professing Christians have as much of the animal as warm and spiritual Christians.
0.126	So far, then, as animal feeling goes, they can all sympathize, and indeed we often see that they do.
0.127	Adopt a strain of exhortation or preaching that is calculated to awaken mere sympathy and animal feeling, and you will soon see that there is a perfect community of feeling among cold- and warm-hearted Christians and sinners; they will all weep and seem to melt, and no one will be offended—and, I may add, no one will be convicted or converted.
0.128	But change your style, and become more spiritual and holy in your matter, and throw yourself out in an ardent and powerful manner in direct appeal to the conscience and the heart—their tears will soon be dried, the carnal and cold-hearted will become uneasy, and they will soon find themselves offended.
0.129	So far as animal feeling goes, they walk together, for in this they are agreed; but as soon as feeling becomes spiritual and holy, they can go together no farther; for here they are not—and, while sinners remain impenitent and cold hearts remain cold, they cannot be—agreed.
0.130	Again—we may see why impenitent sinners cannot like pure revivals of religion.
0.131	It is because God is in them.
0.132	They hate God, and this is the reason why God commands them to make themselves a new heart.
0.133	This is the reason, and the only reason, why sinners need a new heart.
0.134	Now, while they are under the influence of “a carnal mind, which is enmity against God,” they do, and self-evidently must, hate everything like God, precisely in proportion as they see it bear his image.
0.135	Hence we see that the more a revival is stripped of animal feeling and of everything wrong, the more it will necessarily offend wrong hearts.
0.136	The more of God and the less of human imperfection there is to be seen in them, the more they will and must excite the enmity of carnal hearts.
0.137	Again, we learn how to evaluate apparent revivals where there is no opposition from the wicked.
0.138	If persons under the dominion of a carnal mind do not oppose, it must be due to one of three causes.
0.139	First, either they are so convicted that they dare not openly oppose (and even then they are opposed in heart); or, second, there is nothing of the Holy Spirit in them; or third, which often happens, through an injudicious application of means to the sympathies of the multitude, the operations of the Holy Spirit are kept out of the sinner’s view and covered up in the rubbish of animal feeling.
0.140	Anything that keeps the work of the Holy Spirit out of the sinner’s view tends to prevent opposition.
0.141	And everything that exposes the hand of God to the sinner’s view will certainly excite the opposition of his unregenerate heart.
0.142	That excitement, therefore, which does not call out the opposition of the wicked and wrong-hearted is either not a revival of religion at all, or it is so conducted that sinners do not see the finger of God in it.
0.143	Hence we see that the more pure and holy the means used to promote a revival of religion are—the more they are stripped of human infirmity and sympathy, and the more like God they are—so much the more, of necessity, will they excite the opposition of all wrong hearts.
0.144	For while a man’s heart is wrong on any subject, it is self-evident that he cannot heartily approve of what is right on that subject, for this would involve a contradiction.
0.145	It would be the same as saying that he could feel both right and wrong on the same subject at the same time.
0.146	Hence it appears that, other things being equal, those means and that preaching, both as to matter and manner, which call forth the most of the native enmity of the heart, and which are most directly set against wrong hearts, are nearest right.
0.147	Hence we see the folly of those who are laboring to please persons whose affections are in a wrong state on religious subjects.
0.148	They cannot be pleased with anything right and holy while their hearts are in this wrong state, for this, as we have just seen, would involve a contradiction.
0.149	This shows why so much wrong feeling is often stirred up in revivals of religion.
0.150	It is the natural effect of pure revivals to stir up wrong feeling in wrong hearts.
0.151	Revivals of religion on earth stir up wrong feeling in hell; they will disturb the same spirit and stir up the same feelings whenever they come in contact with rebellious hearts, whether in the church or out of it.
0.152	Wherever the Holy Spirit comes, or is seen to operate, the opposite spirit is naturally disturbed.
0.153	A great degree of right and holy feeling among saints will naturally stir up a great degree of unholy and wicked feeling in all those hearts that are determinedly wrong.
0.154	The more right and holy feeling there is, the more wrong and unholy feeling there will be, of course, unless sinners and carnal professing Christians bow and submit.
0.155	They cannot walk together, because they are not agreed; and the more holy and heavenly the saints become in their affections and conduct, the farther apart they will be, until the light of eternity sets them, in feeling and affections, as far apart as heaven and hell.
0.156	This shows that the difference between heaven and hell, as regards moral character, and happiness and misery, consists in the different state of the hearts or affections of their respective inhabitants.
0.157	This demonstrates, beyond all contradiction, that sinners cannot be saved unless they are born again.
0.158	In other words, it is plainly impossible, in the nature of things, that sinners should walk and be happy with saints and holy angels without an entire change in their affections.
0.159	Sinners cannot walk with the saints here.
0.160	As soon as the saints cease to walk “according to the course of this world,” sinners think it strange that they do not run with them into the same excess of reckless living, “speaking evil of them.”
0.161	As soon as Christians awake and become spiritual and active, holy and heavenly, and break off from their vain and wicked associations with the world, sinners are uniformly distressed and offended.
0.162	They try to imagine that it is something wrong in the saints, and in revivals, that offends them.
0.163	But the truth is, it is the little that is right in the saints, and that in which there is the most of God in revivals, that offends them most.
0.164	And were the saints as holy as angels are, or as holy as they will be in heaven, sinners must of course be so much the farther from having any community of feeling with them; and as saints rise in holiness and sinners sink in sin, they will go farther and farther apart forever and ever.
0.165	I remark, lastly, that this shows why the lives and preaching of the prophets, of Christ and his apostles, and the revivals of the early ages of the church, met with so much more violent opposition from carnal people who professed religion, and from ungodly sinners, than is offered to preachers and revivals in these days.
0.166	It is not to be denied that the saints in those days “had trials of cruel mocking and scourging, yes, of bonds and imprisonment; they were stoned, they were sawn apart, were tempted, were killed with the sword; they wandered about in sheepskins and goatskins, being destitute, afflicted, tormented (of whom the world was not worthy); they wandered in deserts, in mountains, and in dens and caves of the earth.”
0.167	It is not, and cannot be, denied that the preaching of the prophets, of Christ and his apostles, and of the early ministers was opposed with great bitterness by many professed saints and by multitudes of ungodly sinners—more than that of any preacher of the present day.
0.168	Nor is it to be concealed that people who professed religion were often leaders in this opposition—that they stirred up the Romans to crucify Jesus, and afterward to persecute and destroy his saints and crucify his apostles.
0.169	And that even the religious teachers and learned doctors of the law tried to prejudice the multitude against the Savior and to keep them from listening to his discourses: “He has a devil and is mad,” they said; “why do you hear him?”
0.170	They led the way in opposing the apostles in the revivals in which they were engaged.
0.171	We must admit, too, that those revivals made a great deal of noise in the world, so much so that the apostles were accused of “turning the world upside down”; and that sinners were often greatly hardened by the preaching of Christ and his apostles, “were filled with great wrath,” and opposed with such bitterness that Christ told his apostles to “let them alone.”
0.172	In some places where the apostles preached, “some were” so “hardened” that they “contradicted and blasphemed, and spoke evil of this Way,” so much so that the apostles were forced to leave and go to other places, and sometimes to leave under very humiliating circumstances, barely escaping with their lives.
0.173	Now these are facts that we need not blush to face, for they are easily accounted for on the principle contained in the text and illustrated in this discourse.
0.174	None of these things affords any evidence that the prophets, and Christ and his apostles, were imprudent and unholy men; that their preaching was too overbearing and severe; or that there was something wrong in the management of revivals in those days.
0.175	The fact is that the prophets were so much more holy in their lives, and so much bolder and more faithful in delivering their messages; that Christ was so much more searching, and plain, and pointed, and personal in his preaching, and so entirely “separate from sinners” in his life; and that the apostles were so pointed and plain in their dealing with sinners and professed saints, and so self-denying and holy in their lives, that carnal professing Christians and ungodly sinners could not walk with them.
0.176	The means then used to promote revivals were more holy and free from alloy than they are now.
0.177	There was less of mere sympathy, and of that hypocritical smoothness of manner, and of those embellishments of language, that are calculated and designed to court the applause of the ungodly.
0.178	“Renouncing the hidden things of dishonesty, not walking in craftiness, nor handling the word of God deceitfully,” they preached, “not with the enticing words of man’s wisdom,” but “with great plainness of speech,” so that the ungodly, in the church and out of it, were filled with wrath.
0.179	Stephen was so holy and searching in his address that the elders of Israel “gnashed at him with their teeth.”
0.180	But this is no evidence that he was imprudent.
0.181	The fact that the revivals of the present day are much more quiet and gradual in their progress than they were on the day of Pentecost, and at many other times and places, and create much less noise and opposition among cold professing Christians and ungodly sinners, does not prove that the theory of revivals is better understood now than it was then, nor that the ministers and Christians engaged in these revivals are more prudent than the apostles and early Christians; and to suppose this would reveal great spiritual pride in us.
0.182	Nor are we to say that the human heart has changed, or that the character of God has become less offensive “to the carnal mind.”
0.183	No! The fact is, the prophets and Christ and his apostles and the early saints were more holy, more bold and active, more plain and pointed in their preaching, less conformed to this crazy world; in a word, they were more prudent and more like heaven than we are; these are the reasons why they were more hated than we are, and why their preaching and praying gave so much more offense than ours.
0.184	Revivals in their days were more free from carnal policy, and from that management which tends to keep the naked hand of God out of the sinner’s view: these are the reasons why they made so much more noise than the revivals we witness in these days, and stirred up so much of earth and hell to oppose them, that they convulsed the world and turned it upside down.
0.185	It was known then that “men could not serve God and mammon.”
0.186	It was seen to be true that “if anyone will live godly in Christ Jesus, he shall suffer persecution.”
0.187	It was understood then that if “ministers pleased men, they were not the servants of Christ.”
0.188	The church and the world could not walk together, for then they were not agreed.
0.189	Let us not be puffed up and imagine that we are prudent and wise, and have learned how to manage carnal professing Christians and sinners, whose “carnal mind is enmity against God,” so as not to call forth their opposition to truth and holiness as Christ and his apostles did.
0.190	But let us know that if they have less difficulty with us, and with our lives and preaching, than they had with theirs, it is because we are less holy, less heavenly, less like God than they were.
0.191	If we walk with the lukewarm and ungodly, or they with us, it is because we are agreed.
0.192	For two cannot walk together unless they are agreed.
