0.1	John 15:25. — “They have hated me without a cause.”
0.2	These are the words of our Lord Jesus Christ.
0.3	In my two former discourses on total depravity, I have endeavored to demonstrate that all impenitent sinners hate God supremely.
0.4	And having, as I suppose, established this doctrine beyond controversy by an appeal to matters of fact, it now becomes a very solemn and important question: why do sinners hate God?
0.5	If sinners have good reason for hating God, then they are not to blame for it; but if they have no good reason, or if they hate him when they ought to love him, then they have incurred great guilt by their enmity toward God.
0.6	In speaking on this subject, I intend,
0.7	1st. To show what is not the reason for their hatred.
0.8	2nd. What is the reason for it.
0.9	3. That they hate him for the very reasons for which they ought to love him.
H:0.7	I. I am to show what is not the reason for their hatred.
0.10	1st. It is not because God has so constituted them that they have a physical or constitutional aversion to God.
0.11	The text affirms that sinners have hated God without a cause.
0.12	Not that there is no reason why they hate him, but that there is no good reason.
0.13	Not that there is strictly no cause for their hatred, for every effect must have some cause; but there is no just cause.
0.14	If God had so created man that he was under a physical necessity of hating his Maker, this would be not only a cause, but a just cause for hating him.
0.15	If God had built into the very substance of man’s being a constitutional aversion to himself, this would be a sufficient cause, not only for the sinner’s hating him, but a good reason why all other beings should hate him.
0.16	2nd. The sinner’s hatred of God is not caused by any hereditary or transmitted disposition to hate him.
0.17	A disposition to hate God is itself hatred.
0.18	Disposition is an action of the mind, and not a part of the mind itself.
0.19	It is, therefore, absurd to talk of a hereditary or transmitted disposition to love or hate God, or anything else.
0.20	It is impossible that a voluntary state of mind should be hereditary, or transmitted from one generation to another.
0.21	If any of you understand by disposition a propensity or temper — not an action, and so not a voluntary state of mind, but a quality or attribute that is part of the mind itself — I say,
0.22	3rd. That the sinner’s hatred is not caused by any such attribute or property that makes up a part of the mind, and which in itself has a natural and necessary aversion to God.
0.23	4th. There is no just cause in the constitution of our nature for opposition to God.
0.24	The nature of man is as it should be.
0.25	Its powers are as God made them.
0.26	He has made them in the best manner in which infinite power and goodness and wisdom could make them.
0.27	They are perfectly adapted to the service of his Creator; and if we survey all the exquisite mechanism and delicate organization of the body, and scrutinize all the properties and powers and capacities of the mind, we can find no just cause for complaint, but on the other hand infinite reason to love and adore the great architect, and to exclaim with the Psalmist, “I am fearfully and wonderfully made.”
0.28	5th. There is no just cause for the sinner’s hatred in that wise and benevolent arrangement by which all men have descended from one common ancestor, and under which divine arrangement we are naturally (not necessarily) influenced, and our characters are shaped by the circumstances in which we have our being.
0.29	Our being so constituted as naturally to influence each other, and to be highly instrumental in shaping each other’s character, is a wise and benevolent arrangement of the highest importance to the universe; but like every other good thing, it is liable to great abuse; and by as much as our influence is more powerful to promote virtue when we do right, by just so much is our influence greater to promote vice when we do wrong.
0.30	6th. Again, there is no cause for the sinner’s hatred in the moral government of God.
0.31	His commandments are not burdensome, nor impossible to obey, nor designed to produce misery when obeyed; but on the contrary, “his yoke is easy, and his burden is light.”
0.32	His commandments are easily obeyed, and obedience naturally results in happiness.
0.33	If God had established a government whose requirements were so high that it was extremely difficult to yield obedience to his laws; if the laws were so obscure and intricate and difficult to understand that an honest mind were in great danger of mistaking the real meaning of his requirements; or if his laws were arbitrary, unnecessary, and capricious; or if they were guarded by unjust and cruel sanctions — if any of these things were true, sinners would have a just cause to hate God.
0.34	But not a single one of them is true.
0.35	Again, sinners have no just cause for their hatred in the requirements of the Gospel.
0.36	If the conditions of salvation held forth in the Gospel were arbitrary, capricious, or unjust; if it were impossible to comply with them; if the terms of salvation were set so high that men do not have natural power to obey them and to fulfill the conditions on which their salvation depends; if God commanded them to repent when they had no power to repent; if he required them to believe when they had no power to believe, and threatened to send them to hell for not repenting and believing — in any and in all these cases, sinners would have just reason to hate God.
0.37	But none of these things is true.
0.38	The conditions of the Gospel, so far from being arbitrary, are in their very nature indispensable to salvation; so far from being set so high that it is impossible, or even difficult, to comply with them, they are brought down as low as they possibly can be without making the sinner’s salvation impossible.
0.39	Repentance and faith are indispensable to fit the soul for the enjoyment of heaven; and if God were to dispense with these conditions, and consent that the sinner should remain in his sins, it would make the sinner’s damnation certain.
0.40	Again, not only are the conditions of salvation necessary in their own nature, but it is easy to comply with them.
0.41	Much easier than to reject them.
0.42	Our powers of mind are as well suited to accept the Gospel as to reject it.
0.43	The motives to accept the offers of mercy are infinitely greater than the motives to reject them.
0.44	So weighty, indeed, are the motives to comply with the conditions of the Gospel, that sinners often find it difficult to resist them, and they are compelled to make almost ceaseless efforts to keep themselves in impenitence and unbelief.
0.45	Again, there is no just cause for hating God in his providential government of the world.
0.46	There is no reason to doubt that God so administers his providential government as to produce, on the whole, the highest and most wholesome influence in favor of holiness that is practicable.
0.47	It is evident that his moral laws are guarded by the highest possible sanctions, and that all has been done which the perfection of moral government could do to secure universal holiness in the world.
0.48	So it is true, beyond all reasonable doubt, that his physical or providential government is administered in the wisest possible manner.
0.49	It is doubtless administered solely for the benefit and in support of moral government.
0.50	It is so arranged as to bring out and exert the highest moral influence that such a government is capable of exerting.
0.51	Many sinners talk as if they supposed God might have administered his governments, both moral and providential, in a manner vastly more judicious and far better designed to secure perfection in the moral conduct of his subjects.
0.52	They seem to think that because God is almighty, he can therefore work any conceivable absurdity or contradiction.
0.53	That he can secure perfection in moral agents by the exercise of physical omnipotence, and that the existence of sin in our world is conclusive proof that, although on some accounts he is opposed to sin, yet on the whole he prefers its existence to holiness in its place.
0.54	They seem to take it for granted that the two governments which God exercises over the universe, moral and providential, might have been so administered as to produce universal holiness throughout the universe; but this is a groundless and most wicked assumption.
0.55	It is no fair inference from the omnipotence and omniscience of God; and the assumption is founded on an erroneous view of the nature of moral agency and of moral government.
0.56	Again, there is no just cause for hatred in anything that belongs to the character of God.
0.57	There is nothing hateful or repellent to any just mind in any view that can be taken of the character of Jehovah.
0.58	But on the contrary, his character comprehends every conceivable or possible excellence.
0.59	Again, there is no just cause for hatred in the conduct of God.
0.60	There is no inconsistency between his conduct and his professions.
0.61	Some people seem to have conceived of God as a sly, artful, hypocritical being, who says one thing and means another; who professes great abhorrence of sin, yet so conducts himself and the affairs of his kingdom as necessarily and purposely to produce it; who commands men to keep his law on pain of eternal death, and after all prefers that they should break it; who commands all men to repent and believe the Gospel, yet has made atonement only for the elect; who, while he requires them to repent, has so constituted them that he knows they are unable to repent; who professes greatly to desire the salvation of all men, and yet has made their salvation depend on impossible conditions.
0.62	Indeed, many seem to represent the conduct and the professions of God as at everlasting variance with each other, and as making up a complicated web of contradiction, absurdity, and hypocrisy.
0.63	But all such representations are a libel upon his infinitely fair and upright conduct.
0.64	Again, there is nothing unkind or unnecessarily severe in the conduct of God toward the inhabitants of this world.
0.65	There has been a great deal of complaint about his conduct among sinners; they have often complained of the injustice of his dealings, and have sometimes asked what they had done that he should chastise them with such severity.
0.66	But all such complaining only proves their own perverseness, and can never fasten any just suspicion upon the conduct of God.
0.67	II. Sinners do hate God because they are supremely selfish, and he is, as he ought to be, infinitely opposed to their supreme object of pursuit.
0.68	The first thing that we discover in the conduct of little children is the desire for self-gratification.
0.69	At what period of their existence this desire becomes selfishness is impossible for us to say.
0.70	That a proper desire to gratify an appetite for food and drink, and all our constitutional appetites, is not sinful is evident.
0.71	These appetites have no moral character, and their proper indulgence is not sinful.
0.72	But whenever their indulgence is excessive, or whenever the indulgence of our appetites comes into collision with the requirements of God — whenever and wherever we indulge our constitutional propensities when we are under an obligation to abstain from an indulgence — in every such case we sin, for in all these cases we are selfish; we make our own indulgence the rule of our duty, instead of the requirement of God.
0.73	We consent to indulge ourselves at the public expense, and in a way that is inconsistent with the glory of God and the highest good of his universe.
0.74	This is the essence, and the history, of all sin.
0.75	Now, at whatever period of our existence we first prefer self-gratification to our duty to God — when we first make self-gratification the supreme object of choice, at what particular moment self-gratification comes to be the ruling principle of our conduct and the highest aim of our lives — it is perhaps impossible for us to determine.
0.76	But whenever this may be, this is the beginning of our depravity.
0.77	It is our first moral act.
0.78	It constitutes our first moral character.
0.79	Everything that has preceded this has had no moral character at all.
0.80	The Bible assures us that this occurs so early in our history that it may be said that “the wicked are estranged from the womb;
0.81	they go astray as soon as they are born, speaking lies.”
0.82	This language is not, of course, to be understood literally, because we do not speak at all as soon as we are born; but the wicked speak lies as soon as they do speak.
0.83	“Behold,” says the Psalmist, “I was formed in iniquity, and in sin my mother conceived me.”
0.84	This language also is certainly figurative; for it cannot be possible that the substance of a conceived fetus should be sin!
0.85	This would contradict God’s own definition of sin.
0.86	He says, “sin is a transgression of the law”; but the law prescribes a rule of action, and not a mode of existence.
0.87	If the substance of a conceived fetus is sin — if the child itself, before birth, is a sin — then God has committed it.
0.88	All that can possibly be meant by this and similar passages, without making utter nonsense of the word of God, and without setting different passages in everlasting contradiction to each other, is that we were always sinners from the beginning of our moral existence — from the earliest moment of the exercise of moral agency.
0.89	And to insist upon the literal understanding of such passages as these is the most dangerous perversion of the Bible.
0.90	Adopt the principle of interpretation that insists on these passages being understood literally, and apply it in the exposition of the whole Bible, and you will prove not only that sin and holiness are substances, but that God is a material being.
0.91	Indeed, here has been the great error on the subject of depravity.
0.92	This grand rule of interpretation — that all language is to be understood according to the nature of the subject to which it is applied — has been overlooked, and the same meaning has often been attached to the same word, whether applied to matter or to mind.
0.93	For instance, to set aside God’s definition of sin as consisting entirely in the transgression of law, and to bring in those figurative expressions that would seem, unless explained by God’s own definition, to represent sin as consisting in something other than voluntary transgression, is to set the Scripture in irreconcilable contradiction to itself, by overlooking one of the most important rules of Biblical interpretation.
0.94	It is to trifle with the word of God.
0.95	It is tempting the Holy Spirit.
0.96	It is a stupid, not to say a willful, perversion of the truth of God.
0.97	Now, the great reason why sinners are opposed to God is not that there is any defect in their nature making their opposition physically necessary, but that he is irreconcilably opposed to their selfishness.
0.98	He is infinitely opposed to the supreme end of their pursuit, that is, to their obtaining happiness in a way that is inconsistent with HIS glory and the happiness of other beings.
0.99	The supreme end at which they aim is to promote their own happiness in a way that is inconsistent with the public good.
0.100	To this he is infinitely opposed.
0.101	As they have an unholy end in view, the means which they use to accomplish this end are, of course, as wicked as the end.
0.102	God is therefore as much opposed to the means which they use as to the end which they are endeavoring to accomplish by those means.
0.103	These means make up the history of their lives.
0.104	They are all designed, directly or indirectly, to achieve the all-absorbing object at which the sinner aims: the promotion of his own happiness.
0.105	God is therefore, as he ought to be, sincerely and conscientiously and infinitely opposed to everything they do or say while in a state of impenitence.
0.106	They would make everything subordinate to their own private interests.
0.107	He insists that they shall seek their happiness in a way that is consistent with, and designed to promote, the happiness of the whole.
0.108	This is, after all, the only way in which, in the very nature of things, they can be happy.
0.109	He accordingly sets himself, with full purpose of heart, to defeat every attempt which they make to obtain happiness in their own way.
0.110	He is the irreconcilable adversary of all their selfish schemes.
0.111	He embitters every cup of selfish joy, “turns their” selfish “counsel headlong, and brings down their violent dealing upon their own heads.”
0.112	Thus you see that sinners hate God because he is so holy.
0.113	While they remain selfish, and he is infinitely benevolent, their characters, their designs, their desires, and all their ways are diametrically opposed to his, and his to theirs.
0.114	They are direct opposites; and until they change, it will always be true, as he has said, “I loathe them, and they abhor me.”
0.115	Holiness is a regard for what is right.
0.116	God requires, on infinite penalties, that every moral being in the universe should do and feel and say that which is perfectly right; less than this he cannot require without injustice.
0.117	But sinners are unwilling to do right.
0.118	They would be at liberty to consult their own private interest in everything, and they of course regard God as an enemy, because he insists on their unqualified obedience to the law of right, however completely it counteracts their selfish schemes.
0.119	Again, sinners hate God because he is so good.
0.120	He is good and does good, and moves on in promoting the public interest in a way that often overturns and scatters to the winds all their selfish projects, and the towers of Babel on which they are attempting to climb to heaven.
0.121	His heart is so set on doing good that, in carrying out his great design, he has often overthrown families and nations that stood in his way; and once he overwhelmed a world of sinners in a flood, to prevent their mischief and to bring the world back into such a state that, through the introduction of the law and the Gospel, he might reclaim mankind and save a multitude from hell.
0.122	Again, sinners hate God because he is impartial.
0.123	They regard their own interest as of supreme importance, and are exerting themselves to make everything in the universe bend to it.
0.124	They would have the weather, the winds, and the whole material and moral universe conform to the great object they have in view: to complete and perpetuate their own happiness.
0.125	But as God has an end in view entirely different from theirs — as his object is to promote the general happiness, and the happiness of individuals only so far as is consistent with the happiness and rights of other beings — he continually thwarts them in their favorite projects.
0.126	The very elements of the material universe are so arranged and governed as often to make shipwreck of their fondest hopes, and to destroy forever their most fondly cherished expectations.
0.127	But this is not all.
0.128	Sinners hate God because he threatens to punish them for their sins.
0.129	He will not compromise with them; he insists on their obedience or their damnation.
0.130	He requires their repentance and reformation, or the everlasting destruction of their souls.
0.131	Now, either alternative is supremely hateful to an impenitent sinner.
0.132	To repent — heartily to confess that God is right and he is wrong; to take God’s part against himself; to give up the pursuit of his own happiness as the supreme object of desire; to dedicate himself, with all he is and has, to the service of God and the promotion of the public interest — is what he is utterly unwilling to do; and since God insists upon it, will make no compromise, but demands unqualified and unconditional submission to his will or the eternal damnation of his soul, the sinner is entirely unreconciled to either.
0.133	He regards God as his infinite and almighty adversary, and makes war upon him with all his heart.
0.134	III. I am to show that sinners hate God for the very reasons for which they ought to love him.
0.135	They are the very reasons for which all holy beings do love him.
0.136	His opposition to all sin, and to all harmful conduct of every kind; his high regard for individual and general happiness; and, in short, all the reasons for which selfish beings are so strongly opposed to him, are the foundation of the obligation to love him, and are the reasons why rational beings who have any regard for the moral fitness of things feel it right, and infinitely binding upon them, to love their Maker.
0.137	He deserves to be loved for these reasons, and for no other.
0.138	And it is for these reasons, and no others, that sinners hate him.
0.139	They do not hate him because he deserves their hatred, but because he deserves their love.
0.140	It is not because he is wicked, but because he is good.
0.141	It is not because they have any good reason to hate him, but because they have every possible reason to love him.
0.142	I mean just what I say.
0.143	Sinners hate God not only in spite of infinitely strong reasons for loving him, but for these very reasons.
0.144	Not only is it true that these reasons for loving him do not prevent their hating him, but they are the very reasons for which they hate him.
0.145	I shall conclude this discourse with several remarks.
0.146	1st. From this subject you can see the ridiculous hypocrisy of infidels.
0.147	It is very common for them to profess to be impartial in their investigations and inquiries after truth.
0.148	They insist that Christians are already committed, and are therefore incapable of giving Christianity a candid and unbiased examination.
0.149	Christians, they say, cannot form a judgment that can be relied upon, because they are already committed in favor of Christianity.
0.150	But infidels seem to suppose that they themselves are in a position to form an unbiased and enlightened judgment, and to examine and decide without prejudice.
0.151	But this is utterly absurd.
0.152	They are not on neutral ground, as they suppose themselves to be.
0.153	They are committed against the Bible.
0.154	That they are the enemies of God is demonstrated by their conduct, entirely apart from the Bible.
0.155	That their lives are such as no good being can approve — such as God, if he is holy, must abhor — is a plain matter of fact.
0.156	It takes no Bible to prove this.
0.157	Now, here is a book claiming to be a revelation from God, demanding of them holiness of heart and life, and threatening them with eternal death for their sins.
0.158	Now, is it not absurd?
0.159	Is it not ridiculous and hypocritical for these enemies of God, committed as they are against God and against this revelation, to set themselves up as the only impartial judges?
0.160	They can sit down to investigate the subject without bias.
0.161	They are on neutral ground.
0.162	They feel no such preconceptions as might misguide their judgment.
0.163	The fact is, granting that Christians are as much prejudiced in favor of Christianity as infidels say they are, still, unless infidels will admit that Christians are perfect — that they are wholly sinless and entirely devoted to God — it will appear after all that Christians are not so liable to be prejudiced in favor of Christianity as infidels are against it.
0.164	Infidels are entirely opposed to God, and all impenitent sinners, as I have shown in the two former discourses, are totally depraved; and until Christians are entirely perfect, they will not be so completely biased in favor of God as sinners are in favor of the devil.
0.165	Until then, of course, they will not be so liable to misjudge in favor of the Bible as sinners will be to misjudge against it.
0.166	Christians, being on the whole in favor of God, and therefore feeling a strong attachment to the Bible, and yet having much remaining sin about them, and therefore liable to feel many objections to the strictness of its claims, are in the best circumstances, and in the most favorable state of mind of any beings in this world, to judge impartially.
0.167	They are not so wicked as to reject what they see to be true, nor so obsequiously disposed as blindly to submit, without investigation, to everything that claims a right to their obedience.
0.168	By this I do not mean that Christians are better qualified to judge the truth of the Christian religion than if they were perfect; but I do mean to repel the absurd assertions of infidels that the Christian’s faith is nothing more than blind credulity.
0.169	There never was at any time piety enough in the church to bear the restraints of pure Christianity, if the evidence in its favor had not come upon them with the power of demonstration.
0.170	2nd. From this subject you can see that the wicked CONDUCT of sinners is no proof that their NATURE IS SINFUL.
0.171	The universal sinfulness of men has been supposed to lead to the inevitable conclusion that the nature of man must be sinful in itself.
0.172	It has been said that in no other way can the universally sinful conduct of men be accounted for.
0.173	It has been maintained that an effect must be of the same nature as its cause; and that, since the effects or actions of our nature are universally sinful, the nature or cause must therefore be sinful.
0.174	But if the effect must be of the same nature as its cause — if the cause must have the same nature as the effect — then God must be a material being, for he is the cause of the existence of all matter, and therefore he must himself be material.
0.175	The soul of man must also be material.
0.176	It acts upon his material body, and causes his body to act upon other material things around him; and as it is constantly producing material changes on every hand, the soul must be material.
0.177	This would, indeed, be a shortcut for disposing of the existence of all spirits.
0.178	But who, after all, will accept this mode of argument, and adopt as a serious and grave truth the absurd dogma that the character of an effect decides in all cases the character or nature of its cause?
0.179	The universally sinful conduct of men is easily and naturally accounted for on the principles of this discourse.
0.180	At the outset they universally adopt the principle of selfishness as their grand rule of action, and this, by the very laws of their mental constitution, corrupts all their moral conduct and gives a sinful character to every moral action.
0.181	If it is asked how it happens that children universally adopt the principle of selfishness unless their nature is sinful, I answer that they adopt this principle of self-gratification, or selfishness, because they possess human nature and come into being under the peculiar circumstances in which all the children of Adam have been born since the fall — but not because human nature is itself sinful.
0.182	The cause of their becoming sinners is to be found in their nature’s being what it is, and being surrounded by the peculiar circumstances of temptation to which they are exposed in a world of sinners.
0.183	All the constitutional appetites and propensities of body and mind are in themselves innocent; but when strongly excited, they are a powerful temptation to forbidden indulgence.
0.184	So many appeals of temptation are made to these constitutional appetites or propensities as universally to lead human beings into sin.
0.185	Adam was created in the perfection of manhood, certainly not with a sinful nature; and yet an appeal to his innocent constitutional appetites led him into sin.
0.186	If adult Adam, without a sinful nature, and after a season of obedience and perfect holiness, was led to change his mind by an appeal to his innocent constitutional propensities, how can the fact that infants, possessing the same nature as Adam and surrounded by circumstances of still greater temptation, universally fall into sin prove that their nature is itself sinful?
0.187	Is such an inference called for?
0.188	Is it legitimate? What! Holy and adult Adam is led, by an appeal to his innocent constitution, to adopt the principle of selfishness, and no suspicion is or can be entertained that he had a sinful nature; but if little children, under circumstances of temptation aggravated by the fall, are led into sin, we are to believe that their nature is sinful!
0.189	This is wonderful philosophy; and what heightens the absurdity is that, in order to admit the sinfulness of nature, we must believe sin to consist in the substance of the constitution instead of in voluntary action, which is an impossible thing.
0.190	And what stamps the inference of a sinful nature with peculiar guilt is that, in making it, we reject God’s own declaration that “sin is a transgression of law,” and adopt a definition which is perfectly absurd.
0.191	3rd. From the view of depravity presented in these discussions, it is easy to see in what sense sin is natural to sinners, and what has led mankind to ascribe the outbreaks of sin to their nature, as if their nature were itself sinful.
0.192	All experience shows that, by the laws of our constitution, we are influenced in our conduct, directly or indirectly, by the supreme preference of our minds.
0.193	In other words, when we desire a thing supremely, it is natural for us to pursue this object of desire; we may have desires for an object which we do not pursue.
0.194	But it is a contradiction to say that we do not pursue the object of supreme desire.
0.195	Supreme desire is nothing other than a supreme or controlling choice; and as certainly as the will controls the actions, so certainly and so naturally shall we pursue that object which we supremely desire.
0.196	The fact, therefore, that sinners adopt the principle of supreme selfishness makes it certain and natural, while their selfishness continues to be predominant, that they will sin, and only sin; and this is in strict accordance with, or rather is the result of, the laws of their mental constitution.
0.197	While they maintain their supreme selfishness, obedience is impossible.
0.198	This is the reason why “the carnal mind, or the minding of the flesh, is not subject to the law of God, nor indeed can be.”
0.199	No wonder, therefore, that sinners whose supreme preference is selfish should find it very natural to sin, and extremely difficult to do anything other than sin.
0.200	This, being a fact of universal observation, has led mankind to ascribe the sins of men to their nature; and a great deal of fault has been found with nature itself, when the fact is that sin is only an abuse of the powers of nature.
0.201	Men have very widely overlooked the fact that a deep-seated but voluntary preference for sin was the foundation and fountain and cause of all other sins.
0.202	The only sense in which sin is natural to men is that it is natural for the mind to be influenced in its individual exercises by a supreme preference or choice of any object.
0.203	It will therefore always be natural for a sinner to sin, until he changes the supreme preference of his mind, and prefers the glory of God and the interests of his kingdom to his own separate and opposing interests.
0.204	4th. Here you can see what a change of heart is.
0.205	Its nature, its necessity, and the obligation of the sinner to change his heart immediately.
0.206	You can see also that the first act which the sinner will or can perform that can be acceptable to God must be to change his heart, that is, the supreme controlling preference of his mind.
0.207	5th. Perhaps someone will object and say, If infants are not born with a sinful nature, how then are they saved by grace?
0.208	But I ask in return, If they are born with a sinful nature, how are they saved by grace?
0.209	Does God create an infant a sinner, and then call it grace to save him from the sinfulness of a nature of his own creation?
0.210	Absurd and blasphemous! What! Represent the ever-blessed God as either directly creating a sinful nature, or as establishing such an order of things that a nature in itself sinful would by physical necessity descend from Adam, and then call that grace by which the infant is saved! (not from its conduct, but from its nature!)
0.211	But let us look at this.
0.212	Here are two systems: the one maintains that infants have no moral character at all until they have committed actual transgression.
0.213	That their first moral actions are invariably sinful, but that before moral action they are neither sinful nor holy.
0.214	That, as they have no moral character, they deserve neither praise nor blame, neither life nor death at the hand of God.
0.215	God might annihilate them without injustice, or he may bestow upon them eternal life as a free and unearned gift.
0.216	The other system maintains that infants have a sinful nature which they have inherited from Adam.
0.217	The Scriptures maintain that all of the human family who are ever saved must be saved by grace; and those who hold the system that the nature of infants is itself sinful suppose that only on their system is it possible to ascribe to grace the salvation of infants who die before actual transgression.
0.218	But let us for a few moments examine these systems.
0.219	Grace is evidently used in different senses in the Bible.
0.220	It is sometimes synonymous with holiness.
0.221	To grow in grace is to grow in holiness.
0.222	Its most common meaning seems to be that of unmerited favor.
0.223	It is sometimes used in a wider sense, and includes the idea of mercy or forgiveness.
0.224	Now, when infants die before actual transgression, it is impossible to ascribe their salvation to grace in any other sense than that of undeserved or unearned favor.
0.225	If they have never sinned, it is impossible that they should be saved by grace, if we include in the term grace the idea of mercy or forgiveness.
0.226	To assert that a child can be pardoned for having a sinful nature is to talk ridiculous nonsense; and it is only in the sense of undeserved favor, excluding the idea of mercy or pardon, that an infant dying before actual transgression can be said to be saved by grace.
0.227	In this sense, his salvation is by grace.
0.228	He has never earned eternal life; he has never done anything by which he has placed God under any obligation to save him, and God might without any injustice annihilate him.
0.229	But if it pleases him, for the sake of Christ, as I fully believe it does, to confer eternal life upon one whom he might without any injustice annihilate, he is conferring upon him infinite favor.
0.230	But let us look at the other system for a moment.
0.231	This denies that infants have a sinful nature, and rejects the monstrous dogma that God has created the nature sinful, and then pretends to save the infant by grace from a nature of his own creation, as if the infant deserved damnation for being what God made it.
0.232	Those who hold this scheme insist that there is as much grace in the salvation of infants on their view of the subject as on the impossible dogma of a sinful nature.
0.233	The fact is that the very existence of the whole human race is purely a matter of grace, having reference to the atonement of Jesus Christ.
0.234	Had it not been for the atonement then in view, Adam and Eve would have been sent to hell at once, and would never have had any descendants.
0.235	The race could never have existed.
0.236	There could never have been any infants or adults (Adam and Eve excepted) had it not been for the grace of Christ in intervening on behalf of man by his atonement.
0.237	It was doubtless in anticipation of this, and on account of it, that Adam and Eve were spared, and the sentence of the law was not instantly executed upon them.
0.238	Now every infant owes its very existence to the grace of God in Jesus Christ; and if it dies before actual transgression, it is just as absolutely indebted to Christ for eternal life as if it had been the greatest sinner on earth.
0.239	On neither of these schemes does the grace which saves infants include the idea of pardon — but on both of them they are saved by grace, inasmuch as they owe their very existence to the atonement of Christ; and in both cases they are delivered from circumstances in which it is certain that, had they lived to form a moral character, they would have sinned and deserved eternal death.
0.240	To think, therefore, of objecting to the view of depravity that I have given in these discourses on the ground that it denies the grace of God in the salvation of infants, is either to misconceive or willfully to misrepresent the views that I have advocated.
0.241	I wish to ask, and I desire that it be answered, if it can be: wherein is any more grace displayed in the salvation of infants on the one system than on the other?
0.242	Will it be said that if the nature of infants is sinful, grace must change their nature, and that there is this difference: that although in neither case does the infant need a pardon, yet in the one case his nature needs to be changed, and in the other it does not?
0.243	But if his nature needs to be changed —
0.244	I deny that this is an act of grace; if God has made his nature wrong and incapable of performing any but sinful actions, he is bound to change it.
0.245	It is consummate trifling to call this grace; to cause a being to come into existence with a sinful or defective nature, and then to call it grace to alter this nature and make it as it should have been at first, is to trifle with serious things and to speak deceitfully for God.
