H:0.0	I. The False Views of Christ's Sufferings
0.1	1. In the first place, some reflect on the sufferings of Christ in such a way that they become angry at the Jews, sing and lament about poor Judas, and are then satisfied; just as by habit they complain about other people, condemn them, and spend their time with their enemies.
0.2	Such an exercise may truly be called a meditation not on the sufferings of Christ, but on the wickedness of Judas and the Jews.
0.3	2. In the second place, others have pointed out the various benefits and fruits that spring from considering Christ's Passion.
0.4	Here the saying attributed to Albertus is misleading, that to think once superficially on the sufferings of Christ is better than to fast a whole year or to pray the Psalter every day, and so on.
0.5	So the people blindly follow him and act contrary to the true fruits of Christ's Passion; for they seek in it their own selfish interests.
0.6	Therefore they adorn themselves with pictures and booklets, with letters and crucifixes, and some go so far as to imagine that in this way they protect themselves against the perils of water, of fire, and of the sword, and all other dangers.
0.7	In this way the suffering of Christ is supposed to work in them an absence of suffering, which is contrary to its nature and character.
0.8	3. A third group sympathize with Christ so much that they weep and lament for him because he was so innocent, like the women who followed Christ from Jerusalem, whom he rebuked, saying that they should rather weep for themselves and for their children.
0.9	These are the ones who run far away in the midst of the Passion season, and are greatly benefited by the departure of Christ from Bethany and by the pains and sorrows of the Virgin Mary, but they never get any further.
0.10	Hence they postpone the Passion for many hours, and God alone knows whether it is devised more for sleeping than for watching.
0.11	And among these fanatics are those who taught what great blessings come from the holy mass, and in their simple way they think it is enough if they attend mass.
0.12	To this we are led by the sayings of certain teachers, that the mass opere operati, non opere operantis, is acceptable in itself, even without our merit and worthiness, as if that were enough.
0.13	Yet the mass was not instituted for the sake of its own worthiness, but to prove us, especially for the purpose of meditating on the sufferings of Christ.
0.14	For where this is not done, we make the mass a temporal, fruitless work, however good it may be in itself.
0.15	For what help is it to you that God is God, if he is not God to you?
0.16	What benefit is it that eating and drinking are healthful and good in themselves, if they are not healthful for you? And it is to be feared that we never grow better because of our many masses, if we fail to seek the true fruit in them.
H:0.4	II. The True View of Christ's Sufferings
0.17	4. In the fourth place, those meditate on the Passion of Christ rightly who so view Christ that they become terror-stricken in heart at the sight, and their conscience at once sinks in despair.
0.18	This terror should spring up so that you see the severe wrath and the unchangeable earnestness of God toward sin and sinners, in that he was unwilling that his only and dearly beloved Son should set sinners free unless he paid the costly ransom for them, as is said in Isaiah 53:8: "For the transgression of my people he was stricken."
0.19	What happens to the sinner, when the dear child is stricken like this?
0.20	There must be an earnestness present that is inexpressible and unbearable, which so immeasurably great a person goes out to meet, and suffers and dies for it; and if you reflect on it very deeply, that God's Son, the eternal wisdom of the Father, himself suffers, you will indeed be terror-stricken; and the more you reflect, the deeper the impression will be.
0.21	5. In the fifth place, you must deeply believe and never doubt in the least that you are the one who martyred Christ in this way.
0.22	For your sins most surely did it.
0.23	So St. Peter struck and terrified the Jews as with a thunderbolt in Acts 2:36-37, when he spoke to them all together: "You have crucified him," so that three thousand were terror-stricken that same day and, trembling, cried out to the apostles: "O beloved brothers, what shall we do?"
0.24	Therefore, when you see the nails piercing through his hands, firmly believe that it is your work.
0.25	Do you see his crown of thorns? Believe that the thorns are your wicked thoughts, and so on.
0.26	6. In the sixth place, now see: where one thorn pierces Christ, more than a thousand thorns should pierce you, yes, they should pierce you like this eternally, and even more painfully.
0.27	Where one nail is driven through his hands and feet, you should eternally suffer such nails and even more painful ones; as will indeed be visited upon those who let Christ's sufferings be lost and fruitless as far as they are concerned.
0.28	For this earnest mirror, Christ, will neither lie nor mock; whatever he says must be fully realized.
0.29	7. In the seventh place, St. Bernard was so terror-stricken by Christ's sufferings that he said: I imagined I was secure, and I knew nothing of the eternal judgment passed on me in heaven, until I saw that the eternal Son of God took mercy on me, stepped forward, and offered himself on my behalf in that same judgment.
0.30	Ah, it is not fitting for me still to play and remain secure when such earnestness lies behind those sufferings.
0.31	Therefore he commanded the women: "Do not weep for me, but weep for yourselves and for your children."
0.32	Luke 23:28; and in verse 31 he gives the reason: "For if they do these things in the green tree, what will be done in the dry?"
0.33	As if to say: Learn from my martyrdom what you have deserved and how you should be rewarded.
0.34	For here it is true that a little dog was slain in order to terrify a big one.
0.35	Likewise the prophet also said: "All generations shall lament and bewail themselves more than him"; it does not say they shall lament him, but themselves rather than him.
0.36	Likewise the apostles were also terror-stricken in Acts 2:27, as mentioned before, so that they said to the apostles: "O brothers, what shall we do?"
0.37	So the church also sings: I will diligently meditate on it, and so my soul within me will exhaust itself.
0.38	8. In the eighth place, one must skillfully exercise oneself in this point, for the benefit of Christ's sufferings depends almost entirely on man coming to a true knowledge of himself, and becoming terror-stricken and slain before himself.
0.39	And where a man does not come to this point, the sufferings of Christ have not become of any true benefit to him.
0.40	For the characteristic, natural work of Christ's sufferings is that they make all men equal and alike, so that just as Christ was horribly martyred in body and soul in our sins, we too, like him, must be martyred in our consciences by our sins.
0.41	This does not take place by means of many words, but by means of deep thoughts and a profound realization of our sins.
0.42	Take an illustration: If an evildoer were condemned because he had slain the child of a prince or king, and you were in safety, singing and playing as if you were entirely innocent, until someone seized you in a horrible manner and convinced you that you had enabled the wicked person to do the deed; look, then you would be in the greatest distress, especially if your conscience also rose up against you.
0.43	So much more anxious should you be when you consider Christ's sufferings.
0.44	For the evildoers, the Jews, although they have now judged and banished God, have still been the servants of your sins, and you are truly the one who strangled and crucified the Son of God through your sins, as has been said.
0.45	9. In the ninth place, whoever perceives himself to be so hard and barren that he is not terror-stricken by Christ's sufferings and led to a knowledge of him should fear and tremble.
0.46	For it cannot be otherwise; you must become like the image and sufferings of Christ, whether it is realized in life or in hell; at the time of death, if not sooner, you must fall into terror, tremble, quake, and experience all that Christ suffered on the cross.
0.47	It is truly terrible to attend to this on your deathbed; therefore you should pray God to soften your heart and allow you to meditate fruitfully on Christ's Passion.
0.48	For it is impossible for us to meditate profoundly on the sufferings of Christ by ourselves, unless God sinks them into our hearts.
0.49	Further, neither this meditation nor any other doctrine is given to you so that you should briskly fall upon it by yourself to accomplish it; rather, you are first to seek and long for the grace of God, so that you may accomplish it through God's grace and not through your own power.
0.50	For this is how it happens that those referred to above never treat the sufferings of Christ rightly; for they never call on God for this, but devise their own way out of their own ability, and treat those sufferings in an entirely human and unfruitful manner.
0.51	10. In the tenth place, whoever meditates in this way on God's sufferings for a day, an hour, yes, for a quarter of an hour, we wish to say freely and publicly that it is better than if he fasts a whole year and prays the Psalter every day, yes, better than if he hears a hundred masses.
0.52	For such a meditation changes a man's character, and almost as in baptism he is born again, anew.
0.53	Then Christ's suffering accomplishes its true, natural, and noble work: it slays the old Adam and banishes all lust, pleasure, and security that one may obtain from God's creatures; just as Christ was forsaken by all, even by God.
0.54	11. In the eleventh place, since such a work is not in our hands, it happens that sometimes we pray and do not receive it at the time; in spite of this one should neither despair nor cease to pray.
0.55	At times it comes when we are not praying for it, as God knows and wills; for it wants to be free and unbound: then a man is distressed in conscience and sorely displeased with his own life, and it may easily happen that he does not know that Christ's Passion is working this very thing in him, of which perhaps he was not aware; just as the others meditated so exclusively on Christ's Passion that in their knowledge of self they could not extricate themselves from that state of meditation.
0.56	Among the first the sufferings of Christ are quiet and true, among the others a show and false; and according to its nature God often turns the page, so that those who do not meditate on the Passion really do meditate on it; and those who hear the mass do not hear it; and those who do not hear it do hear it.
H:0.13	III. The Comfort of Christ's Sufferings
0.57	12. Until now we have been in Passion Week and have celebrated Good Friday in the right way; now we come to Easter and Christ's resurrection.
0.58	When a man perceives his sins in this light and is completely terror-stricken in his conscience, he must be on his guard that his sins do not remain in his conscience like this, and nothing but pure doubt surely come of it; but just as the sins flowed out of Christ and we became conscious of them, so we should pour them back upon him and set our conscience free.
0.59	Therefore take good care that you do not act like perverted people, who bite and devour themselves in their heart with their sins, and run here and there with their good works or their own satisfaction, or even work themselves out of this condition by means of indulgences and get rid of their sins; which is impossible, and, alas, such a false refuge of satisfaction and pilgrimages has spread far and wide.
0.60	13. In the thirteenth place: then cast your sins from yourself onto Christ; believe with a festive spirit that your sins are his wounds and sufferings, that he carries them and makes satisfaction for them, as Isaiah 53:6 says: "Jehovah has laid on him the iniquity of us all"; and St. Peter in his first Epistle 2:24: "Who his own self bore our sins in his body upon the tree" of the cross; and St. Paul in 2 Corinthians 5:21: "He who knew no sin was made to be sin on our behalf, that we might become the righteousness of God in him."
0.61	On these and similar passages you must rely with all your weight, and all the more, the harder your conscience martyrs you.
0.62	For if you do not take this course, but miss the opportunity of stilling your heart, then you will never find peace, and must in the end despair in doubt after all.
0.63	For if we deal with our sins in our conscience and let them continue within us and be cherished in our hearts, they become much too strong for us to manage, and they will live forever.
0.64	But when we see that they are laid on Christ and that he has triumphed over them by his resurrection, and we fearlessly believe it, then they are dead and have become as nothing.
0.65	For they cannot rest on Christ; there they are swallowed up by his resurrection, and you now see no wound, no pain in him, that is, no sign of sin.
0.66	So St. Paul says in Romans 4:25 that he was delivered up for our trespasses and was raised for our justification; that is, in his sufferings he made known our sins and also crucified them, but by his resurrection he makes us righteous and free from all sin, even if we believe the same differently.
0.67	14. In the fourteenth place: now if you are not able to believe, then, as I said before, you should pray to God for faith.
0.68	For this is a matter in the hands of God that is entirely free, and it is also bestowed alike, at times knowingly, at times secretly, as was just said on the subject of suffering.
0.69	15. But now rouse yourself to this end: first, no longer to behold Christ's sufferings, for they have already done their work and terrified you; but press through all difficulties and behold his friendly heart, how full of love it is toward you, which love constrained him to bear the heavy load of your conscience and your sin.
0.70	So your heart will become loving and sweet toward him, and the assurance of your faith will be strengthened.
0.71	Then rise higher through the heart of Christ to the heart of God, and see that Christ would not have been able to love you if God had not willed it in eternal love, to which Christ is obedient in his love toward you; there you will find the divine, good Father-heart, and, as Christ says, will thus be drawn to the Father through Christ.
0.72	Then you will understand the saying of Christ in John 3:16: "God so loved the world that he gave his only begotten Son," and so on.
0.73	That means to know God rightly, if we apprehend him not by his power and wisdom, which terrify us, but by his goodness and love; there our faith and confidence can then stand immovable, and a man is truly born anew in God in this way.
0.74	16. In the sixteenth place: when your heart is thus established in Christ, and you are an enemy of sin out of love and not out of fear of punishment, Christ's sufferings should also be an example for your whole life, and you should meditate on them in a different way.
0.75	For until now we have considered Christ's Passion as a sacrament that works in us and we suffer; now we consider it in such a way that we also work, namely like this: if a day of sorrow or sickness weighs you down, think how trifling that is compared with the thorns and nails of Christ.
0.76	If you must do or leave undone what is distasteful to you, think how Christ was led here and there, bound and a captive.
0.77	Does pride attack you? See how your Lord was mocked and disgraced with murderers.
0.78	Do unchastity and lust thrust themselves against you? Think how bitter it was for Christ to have his tender flesh torn, pierced, and beaten again and again.
0.79	Do hatred and envy war against you, or do you seek revenge? Remember how Christ, who indeed had more reason to seek revenge, prayed with many tears and cries for you and all his enemies.
0.80	If trouble or any adversity of body or soul afflicts you, strengthen your heart and say: Ah, why then should I not also suffer a little, since my Lord sweat blood in the garden because of anxiety and grief?
0.81	That would be a lazy, disgraceful servant who would want to lie in his bed while his lord was compelled to battle with the pangs of death.
0.82	17. Look, in this way one can find in Christ strength and comfort against all vice and bad habits.
0.83	That is the right observance of Christ's Passion, and that is the fruit of his suffering; and whoever exercises himself in it in this way does better than by hearing the whole Passion or reading all the masses.
0.84	And they are called true Christians who incorporate the life and name of Christ into their own life, as St. Paul says in Galatians 5:24: "And those who are of Christ Jesus have crucified the flesh with its passions and its lusts."
0.85	For Christ's Passion must be dealt with not in words and outward show, but in our lives and in truth.
0.86	So St. Paul admonishes us in Hebrews 12:3: "For consider him who has endured such opposition of sinners against himself, that you may not grow weary, fainting in your souls"; and St. Peter in his first Epistle 4:1: "As Christ suffered in the flesh, arm yourselves also with the same mind."
0.87	But this kind of meditation is now out of use and very rare, although the Epistles of St. Paul and St. Peter are full of it.
0.88	We have changed the essence into a mere show, and have painted the meditation of Christ's sufferings only in letters and on walls.
