0.1	1. Like the sacrament of holy baptism, the holy sacrament of the altar, or of the holy and true body of Christ, has three parts which we need to know.
0.2	The first is the sacrament, or sign; the second is the significance of this sacrament; the third is the faith required by both of these—the three parts which must be found in every sacrament.
0.3	The sacrament must be external and visible, and have some material form; the significance must be internal and spiritual, within the spirit of man; faith must apply and use both of these.
0.4	2. The sacrament, or outward sign, is in the form of bread and wine, just as baptism has water as its sign; although the sign is not simply the form of bread and wine, but the use of the bread and wine in eating and drinking, just as the water of baptism is used by immersion or by pouring.
0.5	For the sacrament, or sign, must be received, or must at least be desired, if it is to work a blessing.
0.6	Although at present the two kinds are not given to the people daily, as in former times—nor is this necessary—yet the priesthood partakes of it daily in the sight of the people, and it is enough that the people desire it daily and receive one kind at the proper time, as the Christian Church ordains and offers.
0.7	3. I consider it good, however, that the Church in a general council should again decree that all persons, as well as the priests, be given both kinds.
0.8	Not that one kind is insufficient, since indeed the simple desire of faith suffices, as St. Augustine says: "Why do you prepare your stomach and teeth?
0.9	Only believe, and you have already partaken of the sacrament"; but because it would be fitting and right that the form, or sign, of the sacrament be given not in part only, but in its entirety, just as I have said of baptism that it would be more fitting to immerse than to pour the water, for the sake of the completeness and perfection of the sign.
0.10	For this sacrament signifies the complete union and the undivided fellowship of the saints, as we shall see, and this is poorly and unfittingly indicated by only one part of the sacrament.
0.11	Nor is there as great a danger in the use of the cup as is supposed, since the people seldom go to this sacrament; and Christ was well aware of all future dangers, and yet saw fit to institute both kinds for the use of all His Christians.
0.12	4. The significance or purpose of this sacrament is the fellowship of all saints, from which it derives its common name synaxis or communio, that is, fellowship; and communicare means to take part in this fellowship, or, as we say, to go to the sacrament, because Christ and all saints are one spiritual body, just as the inhabitants of a city are one community and body, each citizen being a member of the others and a member of the entire city.
0.13	All the saints, therefore, are members of Christ and of the Church, which is a spiritual and eternal city of God; and whoever is taken into this city is said to be received into the community of saints, and to be incorporated into Christ's spiritual body and made a member of Him.
0.14	On the other hand, excommunicare means to put out of the community and to sever a member from this body, and in our language that is called "putting one under the ban"; yet there is a difference, as I shall show in the following treatise, concerning the ban.
0.15	To receive the bread and wine of this sacrament, then, is nothing else than to receive a sure sign of this fellowship and incorporation with Christ and all saints.
0.16	It is as though a citizen were given a sign, a document, or some other token as proof that he is a citizen of the city, a member of the community.
0.17	Even so St. Paul says: "We are all one bread and one body, for we are all partakers of one bread and of one cup."
0.18	[1 Cor. 10:17]
0.19	5. This fellowship is of such a nature that all the spiritual possessions of Christ and His saints are imparted and communicated to him who receives this sacrament; again, all his sufferings and sins are communicated to them, and thus love engenders love and unites all.
0.20	To carry our everyday illustration further: it is like a city where every citizen shares with all the others the name, honor, freedom, trade, customs, usages, help, support, protection and the like, of that city, and on the other hand shares all the danger of fire and flood, enemies and death, losses, taxes and the like.
0.21	For he who would have a part in the common profits must also share in the losses, and always repay love with love.
0.22	Here we see that whoever wrongs a citizen wrongs the entire city and all the citizens; whoever benefits one deserves favor and thanks from all the others.
0.23	So too in our natural body, as St. Paul says in 1 Corinthians 12, where this sacrament is given a spiritual explanation: the members care for one another; if one member suffers, all the members suffer with it; if one member is honored, all the members rejoice with it.
0.24	[1 Cor. 12:25f.]
0.25	It is apparent, then, that if anyone's foot hurts him, yes, even the smallest toe, the eye at once looks toward it, the fingers grasp it, the face frowns, the whole body bends to it, and all are concerned with this small member; on the other hand, if it is cared for, all the other members rejoice.
0.26	This figure must be carefully weighed if one wishes to understand this sacrament; for the Scriptures employ it for the sake of the unlearned.
0.27	6. In this sacrament, therefore, God Himself gives through the priest a sure sign to man, to show that, in like manner, he shall be united with Christ and His saints and have all things in common with them; that Christ's sufferings and life shall be his own, together with the lives and sufferings of all the saints, so that whoever does him an injury does injury to Christ and all the saints, as He says by the prophet, "He who touches you touches the apple of My eye" [Zech. 2:8]; on the other hand, whoever does him a kindness does it to Christ and all His saints, as He says, "What you have done to one of the least of My brethren, you have done to Me."
0.28	[Matt. 25:40] Again, he must be willing to share all the burdens and misfortunes of Christ and His saints, their sorrow and their joy.
0.29	These two sides of the fellowship we shall consider more fully.
0.30	7. Now, adversity assails us in more than one form.
0.31	There is, in the first place, the sin remaining in our flesh after baptism, the inclination to anger, hatred, pride, unchastity, and so forth, which assails us as long as we live.
0.32	Against this we not only need the help of the congregation and of Christ, so that they may fight with us against it, but it is also necessary that Christ and His saints intercede for us before God, so that sin may not be counted against us according to God's strict judgment.
0.33	Therefore, in order to give us strength and courage against these sins, God gives us this sacrament, as though He said: "Look, many kinds of sin assail you; take this sign, by which I give you My pledge that sin assails not only you but My Son Christ, and all His saints in heaven and on earth.
0.34	Therefore be bold and confident; you do not fight alone; great help and support are all around you."
0.35	King David also says of this bread: "The bread strengthens man's heart" [Ps. 104:15]; and in other places the Scriptures describe this sacrament as a strengthening.
0.36	So in Acts 9 it is written of St. Paul that he was baptized, and when he had received food, he was strengthened.
0.37	[Acts 9:19] In the second place, the evil spirit assails us unceasingly with many sins and afflictions.
0.38	In the third place, the world is full of wickedness, and entices and persecutes us, and is altogether bad.
0.39	Finally, our own guilty conscience assails us with our past sins, with the fear of death, and with the pains of hell.
0.40	All of these afflictions make us weary and weaken us, unless we seek and find strength in this fellowship.
0.41	8. If anyone is in despair, if he is distressed by his sinful conscience or terrified by death, or has any other burden on his heart, and desires to be rid of them all, let him go joyfully to the sacrament of the altar and lay down his grief in the midst of the congregation, and seek help from the entire company of the spiritual body—just as when a citizen whose property has suffered injury or misfortune at the hands of his enemies makes complaint to his town council and fellow citizens and asks them for help.
0.42	Therefore the immeasurable grace and mercy of God are given us in this sacrament, so that there we may lay down all misery and tribulation and put it on the congregation, and especially on Christ, and may joyfully strengthen and comfort ourselves and say: "Though I am a sinner and have fallen, though this or that misfortune has come upon me, I will go to the sacrament to receive a sign from God that I have on my side Christ's righteousness, life and sufferings, with all the holy angels and all the blessed in heaven, and all godly men on earth.
0.43	If I die, I am not alone in death; if I suffer, they suffer with me.
0.44	I have shared all my misfortune with Christ and the saints, since I have a sure sign of their love toward me."
0.45	See, this is the benefit to be derived from this sacrament; this is the use we should make of it; then the heart cannot help but rejoice and be comforted.
0.46	9. When you have partaken of this sacrament, therefore, or desire to partake of it, you must in turn also share the misfortunes of the congregation, as was said.
0.47	But what are these?
0.48	Christ in heaven and the angels, together with all the saints, have no misfortunes of their own, except when injury is done to the truth and to God's Word; indeed, as we said, every harm and blessing of all the saints on earth affects them.
0.49	There your heart must go out in love and devotion and learn that this sacrament is a sacrament of love, and that love and service are given to you, and you in turn must render love and service to Christ and His needy ones.
0.50	You must feel with sorrow all the dishonor done to Christ in His holy Word, all the misery of Christendom, all the unjust suffering of the innocent, with which the world is everywhere filled to overflowing; you must fight, work, pray, and, if you cannot do more, have heartfelt sympathy.
0.51	That is bearing in your turn the misfortune and adversity of Christ and His saints.
0.52	Here the saying of Paul applies:
0.53	"Bear one another's burdens, and so fulfill the law of Christ."
0.54	[Gal. 6:2] See, in this way you uphold them all, in this way they all in turn uphold you, and all things are in common, both good and evil.
0.55	Then all things become easy, and the evil spirit cannot prevail against such a community.
0.56	When Christ instituted the sacrament, He said: "This is My body, which is given for you; this is My blood, which is shed for you; as often as you do this, remember Me."
0.57	[Luke 22:19f.] It is as though He said: "I am the Head; I will be the first to give Myself for you; I will make your suffering and misfortune My own and bear it for you, so that you in your turn may do the same for Me and for one another, and have all things in common in Me and with Me; and let this sacrament be to you a sure token of all this, so that you may not forget Me, but daily call to mind and admonish one another by what I have done for you and am still doing, that you may be strengthened by it, and also bear with one another."
0.58	10. This is also a reason, indeed the chief reason, why this sacrament is received many times, while baptism is administered only once.
0.59	Baptism is the beginning of and the entrance into a new life, in the course of which boundless adversities assail us through sins and suffering, our own and those of others.
0.60	The devil, the world, and our own flesh and conscience, as was said, never cease to pursue us and oppress us.
0.61	Therefore we need the strength, support and help of Christ and of His saints, which are pledged to us in this sacrament as by a sure token, by which we are made one with them and are incorporated with them, and all our suffering is laid down in the midst of the congregation.
0.62	Therefore this holy sacrament is of little or no benefit to those who have no misfortune or anxiety, or who do not feel their adversity.
0.63	For it is given only to those who need strength and comfort, who have timid hearts and terrified consciences, and who are assailed by sin, or have even fallen into sin.
0.64	What could it do for untroubled and falsely secure spirits, which neither need nor desire it?
0.65	For the Mother of God says, "He fills only the hungry, and comforts those who are distressed." [Luke 1:53]
0.66	11. Therefore, so that the disciples might by all means be worthy and well prepared for this sacrament, He first made them sorrowful and held before them His departure and death, by which they were exceedingly troubled.
0.67	And then He greatly terrified them when He said that one of them would betray Him.
0.68	[Matt. 25:21ff.] When they were thus full of sorrow and anxiety, and were concerned about the sorrow and sin of betrayal, then they were worthy, and He gave them His holy body to strengthen them.
0.69	By this He teaches us that this sacrament is strength and comfort for those whom sin and evil trouble and distress; as St. Augustine also says, "This food demands only hungry souls, and is shunned by none so greatly as by a well-fed soul which does not need it."
0.70	Just as the Jews were required to eat the Passover with bitter herbs, standing and in haste, which also signifies that this sacrament demands souls that are desirous, needy and sorrowful.
0.71	Now if one will make the afflictions of Christ and of all Christians his own, will defend the truth, oppose unrighteousness, and help bear the need of the innocent and the sufferings of all Christians, he will find affliction and adversity enough, besides that which his evil nature, the world, the devil and sin inflict upon him daily.
0.72	And it is God's will and purpose to set so many hounds upon us and drive us, and everywhere to provide us with bitter herbs, so that we may long for this strength and take delight in the holy sacrament, and thus be worthy of it, that is, desire it.
0.73	12. It is His will, then, that we partake of it frequently, in order that we may remember Him and exercise ourselves in this fellowship according to His example.
0.74	For if His example were no longer kept before us, the fellowship also would soon be forgotten.
0.75	So at present we see to our sorrow that many masses are held, and yet the Christian fellowship which should be preached, practiced and kept before us by Christ's example has quite perished, so that we hardly know what purpose this sacrament serves or how it should be used; indeed, with our masses we frequently destroy this fellowship and pervert everything.
0.76	This is the fault of the preachers, who do not preach the Gospel nor the sacraments, but their humanly devised fables concerning the many works to be done and the ways to live rightly.
0.77	But in times past this sacrament was so properly used, and the people were taught to understand this fellowship so well, that they even gathered material food and goods in the church and there distributed them among those who were in need, as St. Paul writes [1 Cor. 11:21].
0.78	Of this we have a remnant in the word "collect," which still remains in the mass and means a general collection, just as a common fund is gathered to be given to the poor.
0.79	That was the time when so many became martyrs and saints.
0.80	There were fewer masses, but much strength and blessing resulted from the masses; Christians cared for one another, assisted one another, sympathized with one another, and bore one another's burdens and afflictions.
0.81	This has all disappeared, and there remain only the many masses and the many who receive this sacrament without in the least understanding or practicing what it signifies.
0.82	13. There are those, indeed, who would share the benefits but not the cost; that is, who gladly hear in this sacrament that the help, fellowship and assistance of all the saints are promised and given to them, but who, because they fear the world, are unwilling in their turn to contribute to this fellowship—to help the poor, to endure sins, to care for the sick, to suffer with the suffering, to intercede for others, to defend the truth, to seek the reformation of the Church and of all Christians at the risk of life, property and honor.
0.83	They are unwilling to suffer disfavor, harm, shame or death, although it is God's will that they be driven, for the sake of the truth and of their neighbors, to desire the great grace and strength of this sacrament.
0.84	They are self-seeking persons, whom this sacrament does not benefit.
0.85	Just as we could not endure a citizen who wanted to be helped, protected and made free by the community, and yet in his turn would do nothing for it nor serve it.
0.86	No, we on our part must make the evil of others our own, if we desire Christ and His saints to make our evil their own; then the fellowship will be complete and justice will be done to the sacrament.
0.87	For the sacrament has no blessing and significance unless love grows daily and so changes a man that he is made one with all others.
0.88	14. To symbolize this fellowship, God has appointed such signs of the sacrament as serve this purpose in every way, and by their very form stir and move us to this fellowship.
0.89	Just as the bread is made out of many grains which have been ground and mixed together, and out of the many bodies of grain there comes the one body of the bread, in which each grain loses its form and body and acquires the common body of the bread; and as the drops of wine, losing their own form, become the body of one wine: so it should be with us, and so it is indeed, if we use this sacrament rightly.
0.90	Christ with all saints, by His love, takes upon Himself our form and fights with us against sin, death and all evil [Phil. 2:7]; this kindles in us such love that we take His form, rely upon His righteousness, life and blessedness, and through the interchange of His blessings and our misfortunes are one loaf, one bread, one body, one drink, and have all things in common.
0.91	This is a great sacrament [Eph. 5:32], says Paul, that Christ and the Church are one flesh and bone [Eph. 5:31].
0.92	Again, through this same love we are to be changed, and to make the infirmities of all other Christians our own, to take upon ourselves their form and their need, and to make theirs all the good that is within our power, so that they may enjoy it [Judg. 9:2].
0.93	That is a real fellowship, and that is the true significance of this sacrament.
0.94	In this way we are changed into one another and are brought into fellowship with one another by love, without which there can be no such change.
0.95	15. He appointed this twofold form, bread and wine, rather than any other, as a further indication of the union and fellowship in this sacrament.
0.96	For there is no more intimate, deep and inseparable union than the union of the food with him who partakes of it, since the food enters into and is assimilated with his very nature and becomes one with his being.
0.97	Other unions, effected by means of nails, glue, cords and the like, do not make one indivisible substance of the objects joined together.
0.98	In the sacrament we become united with Christ, and are made one body with all the saints, so that He concerns Himself for us and acts on our behalf, as though He were what we are—what concerns us concerns Him as much as us, and even more than us; and, on the other hand, so that we also concern ourselves for Him, as though we were what He is, as indeed we shall finally be when we are conformed to His likeness, as St. John says, "We know that when He appears we shall be like Him" [1 John 3:2]; so complete is the fellowship of Christ and all the saints with us.
0.99	Our sins assail Him, His righteousness protects us; for the union makes all things common, until at last He completely destroys sin in us and makes us like Himself, at the last day.
0.100	In like manner, by the same love we are to be united with our neighbors, we in them and they in us.
0.101	16. In addition to this, He did not appoint this twofold form by itself, but gave His true natural flesh in the bread, and His natural and true blood in the wine, so that He might give us a truly perfect sacrament or sign.
0.102	For just as the bread is changed into His true natural body and the wine into His true natural blood, so truly are we also drawn and changed into the spiritual body, that is, into the fellowship of Christ and all saints, and by this sacrament are put in possession of all the virtues and mercies of Christ and His saints, as was said above of a citizen who is taken and incorporated into the city and into the protection and freedom of the entire community.
0.103	Therefore He instituted not simply the one form, but the two separate forms, His flesh under the bread, His blood under the wine, to indicate that not only His life and good works, which are represented by His flesh and which He accomplished in His flesh, but also His passion and martyrdom, which are represented by His blood and in which He shed His blood, are all our own, and that by being drawn into this fellowship we may use and enjoy them.
0.104	17. All this makes it clear that this holy sacrament is nothing else than a divine sign, in which Christ and all saints are pledged, granted and imparted, with all their works, sufferings, merits, mercies and possessions, for the comfort and strengthening of all who are in anxiety and sorrow and are persecuted by the devil, sin, the world, the flesh and every evil; and that to receive the sacrament is nothing else than to desire all this and firmly to believe that it shall be done.
0.105	There follows the third part of the sacrament, that is, faith, on which everything depends.
0.106	For it is not enough to know what the sacrament is and signifies.
0.107	It is not enough that you know it is a fellowship and a gracious exchange or blending of our sin and suffering with the righteousness of Christ and His saints; you must also desire it and firmly believe that you have received it.
0.108	Here the devil and our own nature wage their fiercest fight, so that faith may by no means stand firm.
0.109	There are those who practice their arts and subtleties to such an extent that they ask where the bread remains when it is changed into Christ's flesh, and the wine when it is changed into His blood; and also in what manner the whole Christ, His flesh and His blood, can be contained in so small a portion of bread and wine.
0.110	What does that matter?
0.111	It is enough to know that it is a divine sign, in which Christ's flesh and blood are truly present—how and where, we leave to Him.
0.112	18. See to it that you exercise and strengthen your faith, so that when you are sorrowful or your sins afflict you, and you go to the sacrament or hear mass, you do so with a hearty desire for this sacrament and for what it means, and do not doubt that you have what the sacrament signifies; that is, that you are certain Christ and all His saints come to you, bringing all their virtues, sufferings and mercies, to live, work, suffer and die with you, and to be wholly yours, having all things in common with you.
0.113	If you will exercise and strengthen this faith, you will experience what a rich and joyous wedding supper and festival your God has prepared for you upon the altar.
0.114	Then you will understand what the great feast of King Ahasuerus signifies [Esth. 1:5]; you will see what that wedding is for which God has slain His oxen and fatlings, as it is written in the Gospel [Matt. 22:2ff.]; and your heart will grow truly free and confident, strong and courageous, against all enemies.
0.115	For who will fear any calamity if he is sure that Christ and all His saints are with him and share all things, evil or good, in common with him?
0.116	So we read that the disciples of Christ broke this bread and ate with great gladness of heart.
0.117	Since, then, this work is so great that our insignificant souls dare not desire it, to say nothing of hoping for or expecting it, it is necessary and profitable to go often to the sacrament, or at least in the daily mass to exercise and strengthen this faith, on which everything depends and for the sake of which it was instituted.
0.118	For if you doubt, you do God the greatest dishonor and regard Him as unfaithful and a liar.
0.119	If you cannot believe, pray for faith, as was said above in the other treatise.
0.120	19. See to it also that you make yourself a companion of every man and by no means exclude anyone in hatred or anger; for this sacrament of fellowship, love and unity cannot tolerate discord and dissension.
0.121	You must let the infirmities and needs of others burden your heart as though they were your own, and offer them your strength as though it were their own, just as Christ does for you in the sacrament.
0.122	That is what we mean by being changed into one another through love: out of many particles becoming one bread and drink, giving up one's own form and taking one that belongs to all.
0.123	For this reason slanderers and those who wickedly judge and despise others cannot help but receive death in the sacrament, as St. Paul writes [1 Cor. 11:29].
0.124	For they do not do to their neighbor what they seek from Christ and what the sacrament indicates; they wish them no good, have no sympathy with them, do not receive them as they desire to be received by Christ, and then fall into such blindness that they do not know what else to do in this sacrament except to fear and honor Christ in the sacrament with their prayers and devotion.
0.125	When they have done this, they think they have done their whole duty, although Christ has given His body for this purpose: that the significance of the sacrament, that is, fellowship and mutual love, may be put into practice, and that His own natural body be less regarded than His spiritual body, which is the fellowship of His saints.
0.126	What concerns Him most, especially in this sacrament, is that faith in the fellowship with Him and with His saints may be rightly exercised and become strong in us, and that we, in accordance with it, may rightly exercise our fellowship with one another.
0.127	This purpose of Christ they do not perceive, and in their devoutness they daily say and hear mass and remain every day the same; indeed, they become worse daily, and do not notice it.
0.128	Therefore take heed: it is more needful that you discern the spiritual than that you discern the natural body of Christ, and faith in the spiritual is more needful than faith in the natural.
0.129	For the natural without the spiritual profits us nothing in this sacrament; a change must occur and show itself through love.
0.130	20. There are many who, regardless of this change of love and faith, rely upon the fact that the mass or the sacrament is, as they say, opus gratum opere operato, that is, a work which of itself pleases God, even though those who perform it do not please Him.
0.131	From this they conclude that, however unworthily masses are said, it is nonetheless a good thing to have many masses, since the harm comes to those who say or use them unworthily.
0.132	I grant everyone his opinion, but such fables do not please me.
0.133	For if you wish to speak this way, there is no creature nor work that does not of itself please God, as it is written, "God saw all His works, and they pleased Him."
0.134	[Gen. 1:31] What good can come of it if one misuses bread, wine, gold, and every good creature, though of themselves they are pleasing to God?
0.135	No, condemnation is the result.
0.136	So too here: the more precious the sacrament, the greater the harm which comes upon the whole congregation from its misuse.
0.137	For it was not instituted for its own sake, that it might please God, but for our sake, that we might use it rightly, exercise our faith by it, and by it become pleasing to God.
0.138	If it is merely an opus operatum, it works only harm; it must become an opus operantis.
0.139	Just as bread and wine work only harm if they are not used, no matter how much they please God of themselves, so it is not enough that the sacrament be prepared (that is, opus operatum); it must also be used in faith (that is, opus operantis).
0.140	And we must take care that such dangerous interpretations do not turn our minds away from the sacrament's power and virtue, and that faith does not perish entirely through such false security in the outwardly completed sacrament.
0.141	All this comes about because in this sacrament they pay more heed to Christ's natural body than to the fellowship, the spiritual body.
0.142	Christ on the cross was also a completed work, which was well pleasing to God; but the Jews to this day have found it a stumbling block, for the reason that they did not make of it a work that must be used in faith.
0.143	See to it, then, that the sacrament is for you an opus operantis, that is, a work that is made use of, and that it is well pleasing to God, not because of what it is in itself, but because of your faith and your right use of it.
0.144	The Word of God is also of itself pleasing to God, but it is harmful to me when it does not please God also within me.
0.145	In short, such expressions as opus operatum and opus operantis are nothing but useless words of men, more of a hindrance than a help.
0.146	And who could tell all the abominable abuses and false beliefs which multiply daily about this blessed sacrament, although some of them are so spiritual and holy that they might almost lead an angel astray?
0.147	Briefly, whoever would understand the abuses need only keep before him the use and faith of this sacrament described above; namely, that there must be a sorrowing, hungry soul, desiring heartily the love, help and support of the entire communion of Christ and of all saints, not doubting that in faith it obtains them, and then, on the other hand, making itself one with everyone.
0.148	Whoever does not direct and order the hearing or reading of masses and the reception of the sacrament in this way errs, and does not use this sacrament to his salvation.
0.149	For this reason also the world is overwhelmed with pestilences, wars and other horrible plagues, since with our many masses we only call down on ourselves the more disfavor.
0.150	21. We see now how necessary this sacrament is for those who must face death or other dangers of body and soul, since they are not left alone in them, but are strengthened in the communion of Christ and all saints.
0.151	Therefore Christ also instituted it and gave it to His disciples in their extreme need and danger.
0.152	Since we are all daily surrounded by all kinds of danger, and must at last die, we should humbly and heartily and with all our powers thank the God of all mercy for giving us a gracious sign by which, if we hold fast to it by faith,
0.153	He leads and draws us through death and every danger to Himself, to Christ, and to all saints.
0.154	Therefore it is also profitable and necessary that the love and fellowship of Christ and all saints be hidden, invisible and spiritual, and that only a bodily, visible and outward sign of it be given to us.
0.155	For if this love, fellowship and help were known to all, like the temporal fellowship of men, we would not be strengthened nor trained by it to put our trust in the invisible and eternal things, or to desire them, but would much rather be trained to put our trust only in temporal, visible things, and to become so accustomed to them as to be unwilling to let them go and to follow God onward; we would thus be prevented from ever coming to Him, if we followed God only as far as visible and tangible things led us.
0.156	For everything of time and sense must fall away, and we must learn to do without it, if we are to come to God.
0.157	Therefore the mass and this sacrament are a sign by which we train and accustom ourselves to let go of all visible love, help and comfort, and to trust in Christ and in the invisible love, help and comfort of His saints.
0.158	For death takes away everything visible and separates us from men and temporal things; hence, to meet death, we must have the help of the invisible and eternal things; and these are shown to us in the sacrament and sign, to which we cling by faith until we attain to them also by sight.
0.159	Thus the sacrament is for us a ford, a bridge, a door, a ship, and a litter, in which and by which we pass from this world into eternal life.
0.160	Therefore everything depends on faith.
0.161	He who does not believe is like one who must cross the sea, but is so timid that he does not trust the ship; and so he must remain and never be saved, because he does not embark and cross over.
0.162	This is due to our dependence on the senses and to our untried faith, which shrinks from the passage across the Jordan of death—and the devil also cruelly helps toward this.
0.163	22. This was indicated long ago in Joshua 3 [Josh. 3:7ff.].
0.164	After the children of Israel had gone dry-shod through the Red Sea, a type of baptism, they went through the Jordan in like manner; but the priests stood with the ark in the Jordan, and the water below them flowed on, while the water above them stood up in a heap—a type of this sacrament.
0.165	The priests carry and uphold the ark in the Jordan when, in the hour of our death or peril, they preach and administer to us this sacrament, Christ, and the fellowship of all saints.
0.166	If we believe, the waters below us depart; that is, the temporal, visible things do not harm us, but flee from us.
0.167	And those above us stand up high, as though they would overwhelm us; these are the horrors and apparitions of the other world, which terrify us at the hour of death.
0.168	If, however, we pay no heed to them, and pass on with a firm faith, we shall enter into eternal life dry-shod and unharmed.
0.169	We have, therefore, two principal sacraments in the church, baptism and the bread.
0.170	Baptism leads us into a new life on earth; the bread guides us through death into eternal life.
0.171	And the two are prefigured by the Red Sea and the Jordan, and by the two lands, one beyond the Jordan and one on this side of it.
0.172	Therefore our Lord said at the Last Supper: "I will not drink from now on of this fruit of the vine until that day when I drink it new with you in My Father's kingdom."
0.173	[Matt. 26:29] So entirely is this sacrament intended and ordained to strengthen us against death and to give us entrance into eternal life.
0.174	Finally, the blessing of this sacrament is fellowship and love, by which we are strengthened against death and all evil.
0.175	This fellowship is twofold: on the one hand we partake of Christ and all saints; on the other hand we permit all Christians to be partakers of us, in whatever way they and we are able; so that by this sacrament all self-seeking love is uprooted and gives place to love which seeks the common good of all, and through this mutual love there is one bread, one drink, one body, one community—that is the true union of Christian brethren.
0.176	Now let us see how the pretentious brotherhoods, of which there are now so many, measure up to this and resemble it.
H:0.31	Concerning the Brotherhoods
