0.239	47. From this we see that the law and the prophets cannot be rightly preached and known unless we see Christ wrapped up in them.
0.240	It is true that Christ does not seem to be in them, nor do the Jews find him there.
0.241	They appear to be insignificant and unimportant clothes, simple words, which seem to speak of unimportant external matters whose meaning is not recognized; but the New Testament, the Gospel, must open it, shed its light upon it, and reveal it, as has been said.
0.242	48. First of all, then, the Gospel must be heard, and the appearance and the voice of the angel must be believed.
0.243	Had the shepherds not heard from the angel that Christ lay there, they might have seen him ten thousand times without ever knowing that the child was Christ.
0.244	Accordingly St. Paul says, 2 Corinthians 3:16, that the law remains dark and covered up for the Jews until they are converted to Christ.
0.245	Christ must first be heard in the Gospel; then it will be seen how beautiful and lovely the whole Old Testament is in harmony with him, so that a man cannot help giving himself in submission to faith, and he is enabled to recognize the truth of what Christ says in John 5:46, "For if you believed Moses, you would believe me, for he wrote of me."
0.246	49. Therefore let us beware of all teaching that does not set forth Christ.
0.247	What more would you know?
0.248	What more do you need, if indeed you know Christ, as set forth above, if you walk by faith in God and by love to your neighbor, doing to your fellow man as Christ has done to you?
0.249	This is indeed the whole Scripture in its briefest form, so that no more words or books are necessary, but only life and action.
0.250	50. He lies in the manger.
0.251	Notice here that nothing but Christ is to be preached throughout the whole world.
0.252	What is the manger but the congregations of Christians in the churches to hear the preaching?
0.253	We are the beasts before this manger; and Christ is laid before us, upon whom we are to feed our souls.
0.254	Whoever goes to hear the preaching goes to this manger; but it must be the preaching of Christ.
0.255	Not all mangers have Christ, nor do all sermons teach the true faith.
0.256	There was but one manger in Bethlehem in which this treasure lay, and besides, it was an empty and despised manger in which there was no fodder.
0.257	Therefore the preaching of the Gospel is separated from all other things; it has and teaches nothing besides Christ. Should anything else be taught, then it is no longer the manger of Christ, but the manger of war horses, full of temporal things and of fodder for the body.
0.258	51. But in order to show that Christ in swaddling clothes represents the faith in the Old Testament, we will here give several examples.
0.259	We read in Matthew
0.260	8:4, when Christ cleansed the leper, that he said to him: "Go, show yourself to the priest, and offer the gift that Moses commanded, as a testimony to them."
0.261	Here you perceive that the law of Moses was given to the Jews as a testimony, or sign, as the angel also says here, namely, that such law represents something different from itself.
0.262	What? Christ is the priest; all men are spiritual lepers because of unbelief; but when we come to faith in him, he touches us with his hand, gives and lays upon us his merit, and we become clean and whole without any merit on our part whatever.
0.263	We are therefore to show our gratitude to him and acknowledge that we have not become pious by our own works, but through his grace; then our course will be right before God.
0.264	In addition, we are to offer our gifts, that is, give of our own to help our fellow man, to do good to him as Christ has done to us.
0.265	Thus Christ is served and an offering is brought to the rightful priest, for it is done for his sake, in order to love and praise him.
0.266	Do you see here how, figuratively speaking, Christ and the faith are wrapped up in the plain Scriptures?
0.267	Here it is made evident how Moses in the law gave only a testimony and an interpretation of Christ.
0.268	The whole Old Testament should be understood in this manner, and should be taken to be the swaddling clothes, as a sign pointing out Christ and making him known.
0.269	52. Again, it was commanded that the Sabbath should be strictly observed and no work should be done, which shows that not our works but Christ's works should dwell in us; for it is written that we are not saved by our works but by the works of Christ.
0.270	Now these works of Christ are twofold, as shown before.
0.271	On the one hand, those that Christ has done personally without us, which are the most important and in which we believe.
0.272	The others, those he performs in us, in our love to our neighbor.
0.273	The first may be called the evening works and the second the morning works, so that evening and morning make one day, as it is written in Genesis 1:5; for the Scriptures begin the day in the evening and end it in the morning, that is, the evening with the night is the first half, and the morning with the day is the second half of the whole natural day.
0.274	Now as the first half is dark and the second half is light, so the first works of Christ are concealed in our faith, but the others, the works of love, are to appear, to be openly shown toward our fellow man.
0.275	Here, then, you see how the whole Sabbath is observed and hallowed.
0.276	55. Do you see how beautifully Christ lies in these swaddling clothes?
0.277	How beautifully the Old Testament reveals the faith and love of Christ and of his Christians?
0.278	Now, swaddling clothes are as a rule of two kinds: the outer of coarse woolen cloth, the inner of linen.
0.279	The outer or coarse woolen cloth represents the testimony of the law, but the linen represents the words of the prophets.
0.280	As Isaiah says in 7:14, "Behold, a virgin shall conceive and bear a son, and shall call his name Immanuel," and similar passages, which would not be understood of Christ had the Gospel not revealed it and shown that Christ is in them.
0.281	54. Here, then, we have these two, the faith and the Gospel, that these and nothing else are to be preached throughout Christendom.
0.282	Let us now see who are to be the preachers and who the learners.
0.283	The preachers are to be angels, that is, God's messengers, who are to lead a heavenly life and are to be constantly engaged with God's Word, so that under no circumstances do they preach the doctrine of men.
0.284	It is a most incongruous thing to be God's messenger and not to further God's message.
0.285	Angelus means a messenger, and Luke calls him God's messenger (Angelus Domini).
0.286	The message also is of more importance than the messenger's life.
0.287	If he leads a wicked life, he injures only himself; but if he brings a false message in place of God's message, he leads astray and injures everyone who hears him, and causes idolatry among the people, in that they accept lies for the truth, honor men instead of God, and pray to the devil instead of to God.
0.288	55. There is no more terrible plague, misfortune, or cause for distress on earth than a preacher who does not preach God's Word; of whom, alas, the world today is full; and yet they think they are pious and do good, when indeed their whole work is nothing but murdering souls, blaspheming God, and setting up idolatry, so that it would be much better for them if they were robbers, murderers, and the worst scoundrels, for then they would know that they are doing wickedly.
0.289	But now they go about under spiritual names and outward show, as priest, bishop, pope, and are at the same time ravening wolves in sheep's clothing, and it would be well if no one ever heard their preaching.
0.290	56. The learners are shepherds, poor people out in the fields.
0.291	Here Jesus does what he says, Matthew
0.292	11:5, "And the poor have good news preached to them," and Matthew
0.293	5:3, "Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven."
0.294	Here are no learned, no rich, no mighty ones, for such people do not as a rule accept the Gospel.
0.295	The Gospel is a heavenly treasure, which will not tolerate any other treasure and will not agree with any earthly guest in the heart.
0.296	Therefore whoever loves the one must let go of the other, as Christ says, Matthew
0.297	6:24: "You cannot serve God and mammon."
0.298	This is shown by the shepherds in that they were in the field, under the canopy of heaven, and not in houses, showing that they do not hold fast and cling to temporal things; and besides, they are in the fields by night, despised by and unknown to the world, which sleeps in the night and by day delights to walk about so that it may be noticed; but the poor shepherds go about their work at night.
0.299	They represent all the lowly who live on earth, often despised and unnoticed, but who dwell only under the protection of heaven; they eagerly desire the Gospel.
0.300	57. That there were shepherds means that no one is to hear the Gospel for himself alone, but everyone is to tell it to others who are not acquainted with it.
0.301	For he who believes for himself has enough and should endeavor to bring others to such faith and knowledge, so that one may be a shepherd of the other, to wait upon him and lead him into the pasture of the Gospel in this world, during the nighttime of this earthly life.
0.302	At first the shepherds were greatly afraid because of the angel; for human nature is shocked when it first hears in the Gospel that all our works are nothing and are condemned before God, for it does not easily give up its prejudices and presumptions.
0.303	58. Now let everyone examine himself in the light of the Gospel and see how far he is from Christ, and what the character of his faith and love is.
0.304	There are many who are kindled with dreamy devotion when they hear of such poverty of Christ; they are almost angry with the citizens of Bethlehem, denounce their blindness and ingratitude, and think that if they had been there, they would have shown the Lord and his mother a more fitting service and would not have permitted them to be treated so miserably.
0.305	But they do not look beside them to see how many of their fellow men need their help, whom they let go on in their misery unaided.
0.306	Who is there on earth who has no poor, miserable, sick, erring, or sinful people around him?
0.307	Why does he not exercise his love toward those?
0.308	Why does he not do to them as Christ has done to him?
0.309	59. It is altogether false to think that you have done much for Christ if you do nothing for those needy ones.
0.310	Had you been at Bethlehem, you would have paid as little attention to Christ as they did; but since it is now made known who Christ is, you profess to serve him.
0.311	Should he come now and lay himself in a manger, and send you word that it was he, of whom you now know so much, you might do something for him; but you would not have done it before.
0.312	Had it been positively made known to the rich man in the Gospel to what high position Lazarus would be exalted, and had he been convinced of the fact, he would not have let him lie and perish as he did.
0.313	60. Therefore, if your neighbor were now what he shall be in the future, and lay before you, you would surely give him attention.
0.314	But now, since it is not so, you beat the air and do not recognize the Lord in your neighbor; you do not do to him as he has done to you.
0.315	Therefore God permits you to be blinded and deceived by the pope and false preachers, so that you squander on wood, stone, paper, and wax that with which you might help your fellow man.
H:0.80	III. Explanation of the Angels' Song of Praise
0.316	61. Finally, we must also treat the angels' song, which we use daily in our service: Gloria in excelsis Deo.
0.317	There are three things to be considered in this song: the glory to God, the peace to the earth, and the good will to mankind.
0.318	The good will might be understood as the divine goodwill God has toward men through Christ.
0.319	But we will take it to mean the good will which is granted to men through this birth, as it is set forth in the words, "en anthropis eudokia, hominibus beneplacitum."
0.320	62. The first is the glory to God.
0.321	Thus we should also begin, so that in all things the praise and glory are given to God as the one who does, gives, and possesses all things, so that no one ascribes anything to himself or claims any merit for himself.
0.322	For the glory belongs to no one but God alone; it does not permit itself to be made common by being shared with any person.
0.323	63. Adam stole the glory through the evil spirit and appropriated it to himself, so that all men with him have come into disgrace; and this evil is so deeply rooted in all mankind that there is no vice in them as great as vanity.
0.324	Everyone is well pleased with himself, and no one wants to be nothing, and they desire nothing; and this spirit of vanity is the cause of all distress, strife, and war on earth.
0.325	64. Christ has brought the glory back to God again, in that he has taught us how all we have or can do is nothing but wrath and displeasure before God, so that we may not be boastful and self-satisfied, but rather be filled with fear and shame, so that in this manner our glory and self-satisfaction may be crushed, and we may be glad to be rid of it, in order that we may be found and preserved in Christ.
0.326	65. The second is the peace on earth.
0.327	For just as strife must exist where God's glory is not found, as Solomon says, Proverbs 13:10, "By pride comes only contention," so also, where God's glory is, there must be peace.
0.328	Why should they quarrel when they know that nothing is their own, but that all they are, have, and can desire is from God? They leave everything in his hands and are content that they have such a gracious God.
0.329	He knows that all he may have is nothing before God; he does not seek his own honor, but thinks of him who is something before God, namely Christ.
0.330	66. From this it follows that where there are true Christians, there is no strife, contention, or discord; as Isaiah says in 2:4, "And they shall beat their swords into plowshares, and their spears into pruning hooks; nation shall not lift up sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any more!"
0.331	67. Therefore our Lord Christ is called a king of peace, and is represented by King Solomon, whose name means "rich in peace," so that inwardly he may give us peace in our conscience toward God through faith, and outwardly, that we may exercise love toward our fellow men, so that through him there may be peace everywhere on earth.
0.332	68. The third is good will toward men.
0.333	By good will is not meant the will that does good works, but the good will and peace of heart which is equally submissive in everything that may happen, be it good or evil.
0.334	The angels knew very well that the peace of which they sang does not extend farther than to the Christians who truly believe; such certainly have peace among themselves.
0.335	But the world and the devil have no reproof; they do not permit them to have peace, but persecute them to death; as Christ says, John 16:33, "In me you may have peace.
0.336	In the world you have tribulation."
0.337	69. Hence it was not enough for the angels to sing peace on earth; they added to it the good will toward men, that they take pleasure in all that God does, regard all God's dealings with them as wise and good, and praise and thank him for it.
0.338	They do not murmur, but willingly submit to God's will.
0.339	Moreover, since they know that God, whom they have received by faith in Christ as a gracious Father, can do all things, they exult and rejoice even under persecution, as St. Paul says, Romans 5:3, "We also rejoice in our tribulations."
0.340	They regard all that happens to them as for the best, out of the abundant satisfaction they have in Christ.
0.341	70. Behold, it is such a good will, pleasure, and good opinion in all things, whether good or evil, that the angels wish to express in their song; for where there is no good will, peace will not long exist.
0.342	The unbelieving put the worst construction on everything, always magnify the evil, and double every mishap.
0.343	Therefore God's dealings with them do not please them; they would have them different, and what is written in Psalm 18:25-26 is fulfilled: "With the merciful you will show yourself merciful, with the perfect man you will show yourself perfect; with the pure you will show yourself pure," that is, whoever has such pleasure in all things that you do, in him you, and all that are yours, will also have pleasure; "and with the perverse you will show yourself contrary," that is, as you and all that you do do not please him, so he is not well pleasing to you and all that are yours.
0.344	71. Concerning the good will, St. Paul says, 1 Corinthians 10:33, "Even as I also please all men in all things."
0.345	How does he do that?
0.346	If you are content and satisfied with everything, you will in turn please everybody.
0.347	It is a short rule: If you would please no one, be pleased with no one; if you would please everyone, be pleased with everyone; in so far, however, that you do not violate God's Word, for in that case all pleasing and displeasing ceases.
0.348	But what may be omitted without doing violence to God's Word may be omitted, so that you may please everyone and at the same time be faithful to God; then you have this good will of which the angels sing.
0.349	72. From this song we may learn what kind of creatures the angels are.
0.350	Do not consider what the great masters of art dream about them; here they are all painted in such a manner that their heart and their own thoughts may be recognized.
0.351	In the first place, in that they joyfully sing, ascribing the glory to God, they show how full of his light and fire they are, not praising themselves, but recognizing that all things belong to God alone, so that with great earnestness they ascribe the glory to him to whom it belongs.
0.352	Therefore, if you would think of a humble, pure, obedient, and joyful heart praising God, think of the angels.
0.353	This is their first step, that by which they serve God.
0.354	73. The second is their love to us, as has been shown.
0.355	Here you see what great and gracious friends we have in them, that they favor us no less than themselves and rejoice in our welfare quite as much as they do in their own, so much so that in this song they give us a most comforting inducement to regard them as the best of friends.
0.356	In this way you rightly understand the angels, not according to their being, which the masters of art fearlessly attempt to portray, but according to their inner heart, spirit, and mind, so that though I do not know what they are, I know what their chief desire and constant work is; by this you look into their heart.
0.357	This is enough concerning this Gospel.
0.358	What is meant by Mary, Joseph, and Nazareth will be explained in Luke 1.
H:0.94	The Armor of This Gospel
0.359	74. In this Gospel is the foundation of the article of our faith when we say, "I believe in Jesus Christ, born of the virgin Mary."
0.360	Although the same article is founded on different passages of Scripture, yet on none so clearly as on this one.
0.361	St. Mark says no more than that Christ has a mother; the same is also the case with St. John, neither of them saying anything of his birth.
0.362	St. Matthew says he is born of Mary in Bethlehem, but lets it remain at that, without gloriously proclaiming the virginity of Mary, as we will hear in due time.
0.363	But Luke describes it clearly and diligently.
0.364	75. In olden times it was also proclaimed by patriarchs and prophets, as when God says to Abraham, Genesis 22:17, "And in your seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed."
0.365	Again he says to David, Psalm 89:4 and 132:11, "Jehovah has sworn to David in truth; he will not turn back from it: of the fruit of your body I will set upon your throne."
0.366	But those are obscure words compared with the Gospel.
0.367	76. Again, it is also represented in many figures, as in the rod of Aaron, which budded in a supernatural manner although it was a dry piece of wood, Numbers 7:5.
0.368	So also Mary, exempt from all natural generation, brought forth in a supernatural manner, really and truly, a natural son, just as the rod bore natural almonds and still remained a natural rod.
0.369	Again, by Gideon's fleece, Judges 6:37, which was wet with the dew of heaven while the land around it remained dry, and many like figures which it is not necessary to enumerate.
0.370	Nor do these figures conflict with faith; they rather adorn it; for it must first be firmly believed before I can believe that the figure serves to illustrate it.
0.371	77. There is a great deal in this article of which, in time of temptation, we would not want to be deprived, for the evil spirit attacks nothing so severely as our faith.
0.372	Therefore it is of the greatest importance for us to know where in God's Word this faith is set forth, and in time of temptation to point to that, for the evil spirit cannot stand against God's Word.
0.373	78. There are also many ethical teachings in the Gospel, as for example meekness, patience, poverty, and the like; but these are touched upon enough and are not points of controversy, for they are fruits of faith and good works.
