0.177	1. First, let us consider the evil practices of the brotherhoods.
0.178	One of these is their gluttony and drunkenness: one or more masses are held, and afterward the entire day and night, and other days besides, are given over to the devil, and they do only what displeases God.
0.179	Such mad reveling has been introduced by the evil spirit, and it is called a brotherhood, whereas it is rather a debauch and an altogether heathenish, indeed, swinish way of life.
0.180	It would be far better to have no brotherhoods in the world at all than to permit such an abomination.
0.181	Temporal lords and cities should unite with the clergy in abolishing it.
0.182	For God, the saints, and all Christians are greatly dishonored by it, and the divine services and feast days are made a sport for the devil.
0.183	Saints' days should be kept and hallowed with good works, and the brotherhood should also be a special treasury of good works; instead it has become a treasury of beer money.
0.184	What have the names of Our Lady, of St. Anne, St. Sebastian, or other saints to do with your brotherhoods, in which you have nothing but gluttony, drunkenness, squandering of money, howling, yelling, chattering, dancing, and wasting of time?
0.185	If a sow were made the patron saint of such a brotherhood, she would not consent.
0.186	Why then do they afflict the dear saints so sorely by taking their names in vain in such shameful practices and sins, and by dishonoring and blaspheming the brotherhoods named after them with such evil practices?
0.187	Woe to those who do and permit this!
0.188	2. If people want to maintain a brotherhood, they should gather provisions and feed and serve a tableful or two of poor people for God's sake; on the day before they should fast, and on the feast day remain sober and spend the time in prayer and other good works.
0.189	Then God and His saints would be truly honored; this would lead to better conditions, and a good example would be given to others.
0.190	Or they should gather the money they intended to squander on drink and form a common treasury, each trade by itself, so that needy fellow workmen might be helped or lent money, or a young couple of that trade might be fitted out respectably from the common treasury; these would be true works of brotherhood, which would make God and His saints look with pleasure on the brotherhoods, of which they would then gladly be the patrons.
0.191	But where they are unwilling to do this and follow after the old mummery, I urge that it not be done on the saints' days, nor in the name of the saints or of the brotherhood.
0.192	Let them take some other weekday and leave off the names of the saints and of their brotherhoods, lest the saints one day mark it with disapproval.
0.193	Although there is no day that is not dishonored by such doings, at least the festivals and the names of the saints should be spared.
0.194	For such brotherhoods call themselves brotherhoods of the saints while they do the work of the devil.
0.195	3. Another evil feature of the brotherhoods is of a spiritual nature: it is a false opinion of themselves, in that they think their brotherhood is to benefit no one but themselves—those who are members and are on the roll or contribute.
0.196	This damnably wicked opinion is an even worse evil than the first, and it is one of the reasons why God has brought it about that the brotherhoods are becoming such a mockery and blasphemy of God through gluttony, drunkenness, and the like.
0.197	For there they learn to seek their own good, to love themselves, to be faithful only to one another, to despise others, to think themselves better than others, and to presume to stand higher before God than others.
0.198	And so the communion of saints, Christian love, and the true brotherhood established in the holy sacrament all perish.
0.199	Thus a selfish love grows in them; that is, by these many external work-brotherhoods they oppose and destroy the one, inner, spiritual, essential, common brotherhood of all saints.
0.200	When God sees this perverted state of affairs, He perverts it still more, as is written in Psalm 18, "With the perverse You will be perverted" [Ps. 18:26]; and He brings it about that they make themselves and their brotherhoods a mockery and a disgrace, and He casts them out from the common brotherhood of saints, which they oppose and do not make common cause with, into their brotherhood of gluttony, drunkenness, and unchastity, so that they, who have neither sought nor thought of anything more than their own, may find their own; and then He blinds them so that they do not recognize it as an abomination and disgrace, but adorn their unseemliness with the names of saints, as though they were doing right; beyond this He lets some fall into so deep an abyss that they openly boast and say that whoever is in their brotherhood cannot be condemned, as though baptism and the sacrament, instituted by God Himself, were of less worth and less certain than what they have thought up with their darkened minds.
0.201	Therefore their God will dishonor and blind those who, with their mad conduct and the swinish practices of their brotherhoods, mock and blaspheme His feasts, His name, and His saints, to the injury of the common Christian brotherhood, which flowed from the wounds of Christ.
0.202	4. Therefore, for the right understanding and use of the brotherhoods, one must learn to distinguish rightly between brotherhoods.
0.203	The first is the divine, the heavenly, the noblest, which surpasses all others as gold surpasses copper or lead—the fellowship of all saints, of which we spoke above.
0.204	In this we are all brothers and sisters, so closely united that a closer relationship cannot be conceived, for here we have one baptism, one Christ, one sacrament, one food, one Gospel, one faith, one Spirit, one spiritual body, and each is a member of the other; no other brotherhood is so close.
0.205	For natural brothers are, to be sure, brothers of one flesh and blood, of one heritage and home, but they must separate and join themselves to the blood and heritage of others.
0.206	Organized brotherhoods have one roll, one mass, one kind of good works, one festival day, one treasury, and, as things are now, their common beer, common feast, and common debauch; but none of these binds people so closely together as to produce one spirit, for that is done by Christ's brotherhood alone.
0.207	Since, then, the greater, broader, and more embracing Christ's brotherhood is, the better it is, all other brotherhoods should be so conducted as to keep this first and noblest brotherhood constantly before their eyes, to regard it alone as great, and with all their works to seek nothing for themselves, but to do them for God's sake, entreating God to keep and prosper this Christian fellowship and brotherhood from day to day.
0.208	Hence, when a brotherhood is formed, they should let it be seen that its members outstrip other people in order to do Christianity some special service with their prayers, fastings, alms, and good works, and not in order to seek selfish profit or reward, nor to exclude others, but to serve as the free servants of the whole community of Christians.
0.209	If people had such a correct understanding, God would restore good order, so that the brotherhoods would not be brought to shame by debauchery.
0.210	Then God's blessing would follow, so that a general fund might be gathered, with which other people also might be given material aid; then the spiritual and bodily works of the brotherhoods would be done in their proper order.
0.211	Whoever will not follow this method in his brotherhood, I advise him to flee from it and let the brotherhood alone; it will do him harm in body and soul.
0.212	But if you say, "If the brotherhood is not to give me some special advantage, what use is it to me?"
0.213	I answer: If you are seeking some special advantage, how can the brotherhood or sisterhood help you?
0.214	Serve the community and other people through it, as is the nature of love, and you will have your reward for this love without any effort or desire on your part.
0.215	But if you consider the service and reward of love too small, it is evidence that yours is a perverted brotherhood.
0.216	Love serves freely and for nothing; therefore God in turn gives it every blessing freely and for nothing.
0.217	Since, then, everything must be done in love if it is to please God at all, the brotherhood must also be a brotherhood in love.
0.218	It is the nature, however, of what is done in love not to seek its own, nor its own profit, but that of others, and above all that of the community.
0.219	5. To return once more to the sacrament: since the Christian fellowship is also in a bad way at present, as never before, and grows worse daily, especially among the rulers, and all places are full of sin and shame, you should not consider how many masses are said or how often the sacrament is celebrated—for this will make things worse rather than better—but how much you and others increase in what the sacrament signifies and in the faith it demands, for therein alone lies improvement; and the more you find yourself being incorporated into Christ and into the fellowship of His saints, the better it is with you—that is, if you find that you are becoming strong in confidence in Christ and His dear saints, and are certain that they love you and stand by you in all the trials of life and in death, and that you in turn take to heart the shortcomings and lapses of all Christians and of the whole Church, that your love goes out to everyone, and that you desire to help everyone, to hate no one, to suffer with all and pray for them: then the work of the sacrament will proceed rightly, then you will often weep, lament, and mourn for the wretched condition of Christendom today.
0.220	If, however, you find no such confidence in Christ and His saints, and the needs of the Church and of every fellow man do not trouble or move you, then beware of all other good works, if in doing them you think you are godly and will be saved.
0.221	Be assured they are only hypocrisy, sham, and deceit, or they are without love and fellowship, and without these nothing is good.
0.222	For the sum of it all is: Plenitudo legis est dilectio, "Love is the fulfilling of the law."
0.223	[Rom. 13:10] Amen.
