T:0	The First Sermon (Invocavit Sunday)
0.1	The challenge of death comes to all of us, and no one can die for another.
0.2	Everyone must fight his own battle with death by himself, alone.
0.3	We can shout into one another's ears, but everyone must be prepared in the end to meet death alone.
0.4	I will not be with you then, nor you with me.
0.5	Therefore everyone must know for himself the chief things in Christianity, and be armed with them.
0.6	They are the same things that you, my beloved, heard from me long ago.
0.7	In the first place, we must know that we are the children of wrath, and that all our works, intentions, and thoughts are nothing at all.
0.8	To prove this point we must have a clear, strong text, and although there are many such texts in the Bible, I will not overwhelm you with them, but ask you to note just this one: "We are all the children of wrath."
0.9	[Eph. 2:3] And please, do not boast in reply: I have built an altar, given an endowment for masses, and so on.
0.10	Secondly, that God has sent us His only-begotten Son so that we may believe in Him, and whoever puts his trust in Him shall be free from sin and a child of God, as John declares in the first chapter: "He gave them power to become the sons of God, even to those who believe in His name."
0.11	[John 1:12] Here we should all be thoroughly at home in the Bible and be ready with many passages to confront the devil.
0.12	With respect to these two points nothing seems to be lacking or amiss; they have been rightly preached to you, and I would be very sorry if it were otherwise.
0.13	No, I am well aware, and I dare say, that you are more learned in this than I am, and that there are not only one, two, three, or four, but perhaps ten or more, who have this wisdom and enlightenment.
0.14	Thirdly, there must also be love, and through love we must do to one another as God has done to us through faith.
0.15	For without love faith is nothing, as St. Paul says in 1 Corinthians 13: "If I could speak with the tongues of angels, and of the highest things in faith, and have not love, I am nothing."
0.16	[1 Cor. 13:1] And here, dear friends, have you not failed grievously?
0.17	I see no signs of love among you, and I observe that you have not been grateful to God for His rich gifts and treasures.
0.18	Let us beware that Wittenberg does not become Capernaum.
0.19	I notice that you have a great deal to say about the doctrine that is preached to you, about faith and about love.
0.20	This is not surprising; a donkey can almost chant the lessons, so why should you not be able to repeat the doctrines and formulas?
0.21	Dear friends, the kingdom of God—and we are that kingdom—consists not in speech or in words, but in deeds, in works and exercises.
0.22	God does not want hearers and repeaters of words, but doers and followers who exercise themselves in the faith that works through love.
0.23	For a faith without love is not enough—rather, it is not faith at all [1 Cor. 13:12], but a counterfeit of faith, just as a face seen in a mirror is not a real face, but merely the reflection of a face.
0.24	Fourthly, we likewise need patience.
0.25	For whoever has faith, trusts in God, and shows love to his neighbor, practicing it day by day, must necessarily suffer persecution.
0.26	For the devil never sleeps, and he is continually harassing us.
0.27	But patience works and produces hope, which freely yields itself to God and finds comfort in Him [Rom. 5:4].
0.28	Thus faith, through much affliction and persecution, keeps increasing and is strengthened day by day.
0.29	And the heart that by God's grace has received such virtues must always be active and freely spend itself for the benefit and service of the brethren, just as it has received from God.
0.30	And here, dear friends, one must not insist on his rights, but must see what may be useful and helpful to his brother, as St. Paul says, Omnia mihi licent, sed non omnia expediunt, "All things are lawful for me, but not all things are beneficial."
0.31	[1 Cor. 6:12] We are not all equally strong in faith; some of you have a stronger faith than I. Therefore we must not look at ourselves, or our strength, or our rank, but at our neighbor, for God has said through Moses, "I have carried and nourished you, just as a mother does her child."
0.32	[Deut. 1:31] How does a mother nourish her child?
0.33	First she feeds it with milk, then gruel, then eggs and soft food.
0.34	If she weaned it and immediately gave it ordinary, coarse food, the child would never thrive.
0.35	So we should also deal with our brother: have patience with him for a time, bear with his weakness and help him carry it; we should give him milk food too [1 Peter 2:2], as was done with us, until he likewise grows strong, and so we do not travel heavenward alone, but bring with us the brethren who are not now on our side.
0.36	If all mothers were to abandon their children, where would we have been?
0.37	Dear brother, if you have nursed long enough, do not immediately cut off the breast, but let your brother be nourished too.
0.38	I would not have gone as far as you have, if I had been here.
0.39	What you did was good, but you have gone too fast.
0.40	For there are also brothers and sisters on the other side who belong to us and must still be won.
0.41	Let me illustrate. The sun has two properties, light and heat.
0.42	No king has power enough to bend or guide the light of the sun; it remains straight in the place where it shines.
0.43	But the heat may be turned and guided, and yet it is always around the sun.
0.44	Thus faith must always remain pure and immovable in the heart, never wavering; but love moves and is guided according to how our neighbors can grasp it or follow us.
0.45	There are some who can run, others must walk, and still others can hardly crawl.
0.46	Therefore we must not look at our own powers, but at our brother's, so that he who is weak in faith and tries to follow the strong may not be destroyed by the devil.
0.47	Therefore, dear brethren, obey me.
0.48	I have never been a destroyer, and I was also the very first whom God called to this work.
0.49	Nor can I run away; I must remain as long as it pleases God.
0.50	I was also the first to whom God revealed it, to preach His Word to you; moreover, I am sure that you have the pure Word of God.
0.51	Let us, therefore, take up this matter with fear and humility, throw ourselves at one another's feet, join hands with each other, and help one another.
0.52	I will do my part, which is no more than my duty, for I love you just as I love my own soul.
0.53	For here we are fighting not against pope or bishop, but against the devil [Eph. 6:12], and do you imagine he is asleep?
0.54	He does not sleep, but sees the true light rising, and to keep it from shining into his eyes he would make a flank attack—and he will succeed if we are not on our guard.
0.55	I know him well, and I hope too that with God's help I am his master.
0.56	But if we yield him even an inch, we will soon have to see how we can be rid of him.
0.57	Therefore all those who consented to and helped abolish the mass have erred—in itself a good undertaking, but not carried out in an orderly way.
0.58	You say it was right according to the Scriptures.
0.59	I agree, but what becomes of order?
0.60	For it was done recklessly, with no regard for proper order and with offense to your neighbor.
0.61	If beforehand you had called on God in earnest prayer and had obtained the help of the authorities, one could be certain that it had come from God.
0.62	I too would have taken steps toward the same end if it had been a good thing to do; and if the mass were not so evil a thing, I would introduce it again.
0.63	For I cannot defend your action, as I have just said.
0.64	To the papists and the blockheads I could defend it, for I could say: How do you know whether it was done with good or bad intentions, since the work in itself was really a good work?
0.65	But I can find nothing to reply to the devil.
0.66	For if on their deathbeds the devil reminds those who began this affair of texts like these, "Every plant which My Father has not planted shall be rooted up," [Matt. 15:13] or "I have not sent them, yet they ran," [Jer. 23:21] how will they be able to stand firm?
0.67	He will cast them into hell.
0.68	But I have a weapon to brandish in the devil's face, so that the wide world will become too small for him: I know that, in spite of my reluctance, I was duly called by the Council to preach in this place.
0.69	And I wish that you had the same assurance as I. You could so easily have consulted me about the matter.
0.70	I was not so far away that you could not reach me with a letter, especially since I did not interfere with you in any way.
0.71	Did you want to begin something and then leave me to shoulder the responsibility?
0.72	That is more than I can undertake, and I will not do it.
0.73	Here one can see that you do not have the Spirit, in spite of your deep knowledge of the Scriptures.
0.74	Take note of these two things, "must" and "free."
0.75	The "must" is what necessity requires, and it must always be unyielding; for instance, the faith, which I will never allow anyone to take away from me, but which I must always keep in my heart and freely confess before everyone.
0.76	But "free" is that in which I have a choice, and which I may use or not, yet in such a way that it profits my brother and not me.
0.77	Now do not make a "must" out of what is "free," as you have done, so that you may not be called to account for those who were led astray by your use of liberty without love.
0.78	For if you entice anyone to eat meat on Friday, and he is troubled about it on his deathbed and thinks, Woe is me, for I have eaten meat and I am lost!
0.79	God will call you to account for that soul.
0.80	I would like to begin many things in which only a few would follow me; but what is the use?
0.81	I know that those who have begun this thing, when it comes to the point, cannot hold their ground and will be the first to retreat.
0.82	How would it be if I brought the people to the point of attack, and, though I had been the foremost in urging others on, I then fled and did not face death with courage?
0.83	How the poor people would be deceived!
0.84	Let us, therefore, feed others also with the milk that we received, until they too become strong in the faith.
0.85	For there are many who otherwise agree with us and who would also gladly accept this one thing, but they do not yet fully understand it—all such people we drive away.
0.86	Therefore, let us show love to our neighbors, or our work will not endure.
0.87	We must have patience with them for a time, and not cast out the one who is weak in the faith; much more should we regulate what we do and what we leave undone according to the demands of love, provided no injury is done to our faith.
0.88	If we do not earnestly pray to God and act carefully in this matter, it looks to me as if all the misery we have begun to cause the papists will fall on us.
0.89	Therefore I could no longer stay away, but was compelled to come and say these things to you.
0.90	This is enough about the mass; tomorrow we will deal with the images.
T:1	The Second Sermon (Monday after Invocavit)
1.1	Dear friends: Yesterday you heard the characteristics of a Christian, how his whole life is faith and love.
1.2	Faith is directed toward God, love toward man and one's neighbor, and it consists in such love and service for him as we have received from God without our work and merit.
1.3	Thus there are two things: the one, which is the most needful, and which must be done in one way and no other; the other, which is a matter of choice and not of necessity, which may be kept or not, without endangering faith or incurring hell.
1.4	In both, love must deal with our neighbor in the same way that God has dealt with us; it must walk the straight road, straying neither to the left nor to the right.
1.5	In the things that are "musts" and are matters of necessity, such as believing in Christ, love nevertheless never uses force or undue pressure.
1.6	Thus the mass is an evil thing, and God is displeased with it, because it is performed as a sacrifice and a work of merit.
1.7	Therefore it must be abolished.
1.8	Here there is no room for question, any more than if you were to ask whether you should pray to God.
1.9	Here we are entirely agreed: the private mass must be abolished, as I have said in my writings.
1.10	And I heartily wish it would be abolished everywhere, and only the evangelical mass for all the people be retained.
1.11	Yet Christian love should not use harshness here nor force the matter.
1.12	It should be preached and taught with tongue and pen that to hold mass in such a manner is a sin, but no one should be dragged away from it by force.
1.13	The matter should be left to God; His Word should do the work alone, without our work.
1.14	Why? Because it is not in my power to shape the hearts of men as the potter molds the clay, and to do with them as I please.
1.15	I can get no farther than people's ears; their hearts I cannot reach.
1.16	And since I cannot pour faith into their hearts, I cannot, nor should I, force anyone to have faith.
1.17	That is the work of God alone, who causes faith to live in the heart.
1.18	Therefore we should give the Word free course, and not add our works to it.
1.19	We have the jus verbi, but not the executio; we should preach the Word, but the consequences must be left to God's own good pleasure.
1.20	Now if I were to rush in and abolish the mass by force, there are many who would be compelled to consent to it and yet not know their own minds, but would say: I do not know whether it is right or wrong, I do not know where I stand; I was compelled by force to submit to the majority.
1.21	And this forcing and commanding results in mere mockery, an outward show, a fool's play, man-made ordinances, sham saints, and hypocrites.
1.22	For where the heart is not good, I care nothing at all for the work.
1.23	We must first win the hearts of the people.
1.24	And that is done when I teach only the Word of God, preach the Gospel, and say: "Dear lords or pastors, stop holding the mass; it is not right, you are sinning when you do it; I cannot refrain from telling you this."
1.25	But I would not make it an ordinance for them, nor urge a general law; whoever wanted to follow me could do so, and whoever refused would remain outside.
1.26	In the latter case the Word would sink into the heart and do its work.
1.27	Thus he would become convinced and acknowledge his error, and fall away from the mass; tomorrow another would do the same, and so God would accomplish more with His Word than if you and I were to forge all power and authority into one.
1.28	For if you have won the heart, you have won the whole man—and the mass must finally fall of its own weight and come to an end.
1.29	And if the hearts and minds of all people are united in this purpose—abolish the mass; but if not all are heart and soul for its abolition—leave it in God's hands, I beg you; otherwise the result will not be good.
1.30	Not, indeed, that I would set up the mass again; I let it lie in God's name.
1.31	Faith must not be chained and imprisoned, nor bound by an ordinance to any work.
1.32	This is the principle by which you must be governed.
1.33	For I am sure you will not be able to carry out your plans, and if you should carry them out with such general laws, then I will retract everything I have written and preached, and I will not support you; and therefore I ask you plainly: What harm can the mass do to you?
1.34	You have your faith, pure and strong, toward God, and the mass cannot hurt you.
1.35	Love, therefore, demands that you have compassion on the weak, as all the apostles had.
1.36	Once, when Paul came to Athens, a mighty city, he found many altars in the temple, and he went from one to another and looked at them all [Acts 17:16 ff.], but he did not touch a single one of them, even with his foot.
1.37	But he stood in the middle of the marketplace and said they were all idolatrous works, and begged the people to forsake them; yet he did not destroy one of them by force.
1.38	When the Word took hold of their hearts, they forsook their idols of their own accord, and as a result idolatry fell by itself.
1.39	Now, if I had seen that they held mass, I would have preached and admonished them concerning it.
1.40	Had they heeded my admonition, they would have been won; if not, I would still not have torn them from it by the hair or used any force, but would simply have allowed the Word to act, while I prayed for them.
1.41	For the Word created heaven and earth and all things; the Word must do this thing, and not we poor sinners.
1.42	In conclusion: I will preach it, teach it, write it, but I will compel no one by force, for faith must come freely, without compulsion.
1.43	Take me as an example.
1.44	I have opposed the indulgences and all the papists, but never by force.
1.45	I simply taught, preached, and wrote God's Word; otherwise I did nothing.
1.46	And then, while I slept, or drank Wittenberg beer with my Philip and with Amsdorf, the Word so greatly weakened the papacy that no prince or emperor ever inflicted such damage on it.
1.47	I did nothing; the Word did it all.
1.48	Had I wanted to stir up trouble, I could have brought great bloodshed upon Germany; yes, I could have started such a little game at Worms that even the emperor would not have been safe.
1.49	But what would it have been?
1.50	A fool's play. I did nothing; I left it to the Word.
1.51	What do you suppose Satan thinks when an effort is made to do things by violence?
1.52	He sits back in hell and thinks: What a fine game these fools will make for me!
1.53	But it brings him distress when we only spread the Word and let it alone do the work.
1.54	For it is almighty and takes the hearts captive, and if the hearts are captured, the evil work will fall by itself.
1.55	Let me cite an example.
1.56	In earlier times there were also sects, Jewish and Gentile Christians, differing over the law of Moses with respect to circumcision.
1.57	The former wanted to keep it, the latter did not [1 Cor. 7:18 ff.].
1.58	Then came Paul and preached that it might be kept or not, it did not matter one way or the other; they should make no "must" of it, but leave it to the choice of the individual; to keep it or not was immaterial.
1.59	Later came Jerome, who wanted to make a "must" out of it, and wanted laws and ordinances to prohibit it.
1.60	Then came St. Augustine, who held to the opinion of St. Paul: it might be kept or not, as one wished; St. Jerome had missed the meaning of St. Paul by a hundred miles.
1.61	The two doctors butted heads rather hard over the question.
1.62	But when St. Augustine died, St. Jerome accomplished his purpose.
1.63	After that came the popes; they wanted to add something of their own, and they too made laws.
1.64	Thus out of the making of one law grew a thousand laws, until they have completely buried us under laws.
1.65	And so it will be here; one law will soon make two, two will increase to three, and so on.
1.66	Let this be enough for now concerning the things that are necessary, and let us beware that we do not lead astray those of weak conscience.
T:2	The Third Sermon (Tuesday after Invocavit)
2.1	We have heard the things most necessary in the Christian life, and what is a necessary consequence, namely, the doing away with the private mass.
2.2	For the works that are necessary are those which God has either commanded or forbidden, according to the appointment of the Majesty on high.
2.3	But no one shall be dragged to them by the hair or kept from them by force, for I can drive no one to heaven with a club.
2.4	I said this plainly enough, and I believe you understood what I said.
2.5	We will now consider the things that are not matters of necessity, but are left by God to our free choice, and which we may keep or not; for instance, whether one shall marry or not, or whether monks and nuns shall leave the cloisters.
2.6	These things are matters of choice and must not be forbidden by anyone, and if they are forbidden, the forbidding is wrong, since it is contrary to God's appointment.
2.7	In the things that are free, such as being married or remaining single, you should act in this way: If you can restrain yourself without burdening your conscience by it, then by all means do so; but there must be no general law, and everyone shall be perfectly free.
2.8	Any priest, monk, or nun who cannot restrain the desires of the flesh should marry, and so relieve the burden of conscience.
2.9	But see to it that you are well armed and fortified, so that you can stand before God and the world when you are assailed, and especially when the devil attacks you in the hour of death.
2.10	It is not enough to say: This man or that one has done the same; I followed the example of the crowd, according to the preaching of the provost or Dr. Carlstadt, or Gabriel, or Michael.
2.11	Not so; everyone must stand on his own feet and be prepared to do battle with the devil.
2.12	You must rest on a strong and clear text of Scripture if you would stand the test.
2.13	If you cannot do that, you will never hold out—the devil will pluck you like a withered leaf.
2.14	Therefore the priests who have taken wives, and the nuns who have taken husbands, must, in order to save their consciences, stand squarely on a clear text of Scripture, such as this one by St. Paul—although there are many more: "In the latter times some will depart from the faith, heeding seducing spirits and doctrines of devils (I think Paul uses plain language here!), forbidding marriage and commanding people to abstain from foods, which God has created."
2.15	This text the devil will not overthrow or devour; rather, it will overthrow and devour him.
2.16	Therefore any monk or nun who is too weak to keep the vow of chastity should conscientiously examine himself; if heart and conscience are strong, so that he can defend himself with a good conscience, let him marry.
2.17	Would to God that all monks and nuns could hear this sermon and properly understand this matter, and would all forsake the cloisters, so that all the cloisters in the world would cease to exist—this is my earnest desire.
2.18	But now they have no understanding of the matter (for no one preaches it to them), and hearing that in other places many are leaving the cloisters—who, however, are well prepared for such a step—they would follow their example, but they have not yet fortified their consciences and do not know that it is a matter of liberty.
2.19	This is bad, although it is better that the evil should be outside than inside.
2.20	Therefore I say, what God has made free shall remain free, and you must not obey if someone forbids it, as the pope, the Antichrist, has done.
2.21	He who can do so without harm and out of love for his neighbor may wear a cowl or a tonsure, since it will not injure his faith; wearing a cowl will not kill him.
2.22	Thus, dear friends, it is plain enough, and I believe you ought to understand it and not make liberty a law, saying: This priest has taken a wife, therefore all priests must take wives.
2.23	Not at all. Or: This monk or that nun has left the cloister, therefore they must all come out.
2.24	Not at all. Or: This man has broken the images and burned them, therefore all images must be burned—not at all, dear brother!
2.25	And again: This priest has no wife, therefore no priest may marry.
2.26	Not at all! Those who cannot keep their chastity should take wives, and for others who can be chaste, it is good that they restrain themselves, as those who live in the spirit and not in the flesh.
2.27	Nor should they be troubled about the vows they have made, such as the monks' vows of obedience, chastity, and poverty (though they are rich enough all the same).
2.28	For we cannot vow anything that is contrary to God's commands.
2.29	God has made it a matter of liberty to marry or not to marry, and do you, fool, undertake to turn this liberty into a vow against the ordinance of God?
2.30	Therefore you must leave liberty alone and not make a compulsion out of it; your vow is contrary to God's liberty.
2.31	Suppose I should vow to strike my father on the mouth, or to steal someone's property—do you believe God would be pleased with such a vow?
2.32	And just as little as I ought to keep a vow to strike my father on the mouth, so little ought I to abstain from marriage because I am bound by a vow of chastity, for in both cases God has ordered it otherwise.
2.33	God has ordained that I should be free to eat fish or meat, and there should be no commandment concerning them.
2.34	Therefore all the Carthusians and all monks and nuns forsake the ordinance and liberty that God has given when they believe that if they eat meat they are defiled.
2.35	But we must come to the images, and concerning them also it is true that they are unnecessary, and we are free to have them or not, although it would be much better if we did not have them.
2.36	I am not partial to them.
2.37	A great controversy arose over images between the Roman emperor and the pope; the emperor held that he had the authority to banish the images, but the pope insisted that they should remain, and both were wrong.
2.38	Much blood was shed, but the pope emerged as victor and the emperor lost.
2.39	What was it all about?
2.40	They wanted to make a "must" out of what is free, and God cannot tolerate that.
2.41	Do you want to change the ordering of the Majesty on high?
2.42	Not so; you will not do any such thing.
2.43	You read in the Law, Exodus 20, "You shall not make for yourself any carved image, or any likeness of anything that is in heaven above, or in the earth beneath, or in the water under the earth."
2.44	[Ex. 20:4] There you take your stand; that is your ground.
2.45	Now let us see!
2.46	When our adversaries say: The first commandment aims at this, that we should worship one God alone and not any image, just as it says immediately afterward, "You shall not bow yourself down to them nor serve them," and declare that the worship of images is forbidden and not the making of them, they shake and unsettle our foundation for us.
2.47	And if you reply: The text says, "You shall not make any images," they answer: It also says, "You shall not worship them."
2.48	In the face of such uncertainty, who would be so bold as to destroy the images?
2.49	Not I. But let us go further.
2.50	They say: Did not Noah, Abraham, and Jacob build altars?
2.51	And who will deny that?
2.52	We must admit it.
2.53	Again, did not Moses set up a bronze serpent [Num. 21:9], as we read in his fourth book?
2.54	How can you say Moses forbids the making of images when he himself makes one?
2.55	It seems to me that such a serpent is an image too.
2.56	How shall we answer that?
2.57	Again, do we not read that two birds were set up on the mercy seat, the very place where God willed that He should be worshiped?
2.58	[Ex. 37:7] Here we must admit that we may make images and have images, but we must not worship them, and when they are worshiped, they should be put away and destroyed, just as King Hezekiah broke in pieces the serpent set up by Moses [2 Kings 18:4].
2.59	And who will be so bold as to say, when called to account: They worship the images.
2.60	They will answer: Are you the man who dares to accuse us of worshiping the images?
2.61	Do not believe that they will acknowledge it.
2.62	To be sure, it is true, but we cannot make them admit it.
2.63	Remember how they acted when I condemned works without faith.
2.64	They said: Do you believe that we have no faith, or that our works are performed without faith?
2.65	I can do nothing more than put my flute back in its pocket; give them a hair's breadth, and they take a hundred miles.
2.66	Therefore it should have been preached that images were nothing and that God is not served by setting them up, and they would have fallen by themselves.
2.67	That is what I did; that is what Paul did in Athens, when he went into their churches and saw all their idols.
2.68	He did not strike at any of them, but stood in the marketplace and said, "You men of Athens, you are all idolatrous."
2.69	[Acts 17:22] He preached against their idols, but he overthrew none by force.
2.70	And you would rush in, create an uproar, break down the altars, and overthrow the images?
2.71	Do you really believe you can abolish the images in this way?
2.72	No, you will only set them up more firmly.
2.73	Even if you overthrew the images in this place, do you think you have overthrown those in Nuremberg and the rest of the world?
2.74	Not at all. St. Paul, as we read in the Book of Acts, sat in a ship on whose prow the Twin Brothers were painted or carved.
2.75	He went on board and did not bother about it at all, nor did he break them off.
2.76	Why must Luke describe the Twins at this point?
2.77	Without doubt he wanted to show that outward things could do no harm to faith, if only the heart does not cling to them or put its trust in them.
2.78	This is what we must preach and teach, and let the Word alone do the work, as I said before.
2.79	The Word must first capture the hearts of men and enlighten them—we cannot do it.
2.80	Therefore the apostles gloried in their service, ministerium, and not in its effect, executio.
2.81	We will let this be enough for today, and pray God for His grace.
T:3	The Fourth Sermon (Wednesday after Invocavit)
3.1	Dear friends: We have heard the things that are necessary, as for instance, that the mass is regarded as a sacrifice.
3.2	Then we considered the things that are left to our liberty, such as marriage, the monastic life, and the abolishing of images.
3.3	We have treated these four subjects, and have said that in all these matters love is the captain.
3.4	On the subject of images in particular, we saw that they ought to be abolished if they are going to be worshiped, otherwise not, although I wish they were abolished everywhere because they are abused—it is useless to deny it.
3.5	For whoever places an image in a church imagines he has performed a service to God and a good work, which is downright idolatry.
3.6	And this, the greatest, foremost, and highest reason for abolishing the images, you have neglected, and taken up the very lowest.
3.7	For I suppose there is hardly anyone who does not understand that that crucifix over there is not my God, for my God is in heaven, but that this is simply a sign.
3.8	But the world is full of the other abuse, for who would place an image of silver or of wood in a church if he did not think that in doing so he was doing God a service?
3.9	Do you think that Duke Frederick, the bishop of Halle, and the others would have placed so many silver images in the churches if they thought it counted for nothing before God?
3.10	No, they would not do it.
3.11	But this is not sufficient reason to abolish, destroy, and burn all the images; and why?
3.12	Because we must admit that there are still people who do not have the wrong opinion of them, but to whom they may be useful.
3.13	Although they are few, yet we cannot and should not condemn anything that is still useful to the devotions of anyone.
3.14	But you should have taught that images are nothing, that God cares nothing for them, and that He is neither served nor pleased when we make an image for Him, but that we would do better to give a poor man a gold coin than to give God a golden image, for God has forbidden the latter, but not the former.
3.15	If they had heard this teaching, that images count for nothing, they would have stopped of their own accord, and the images would have fallen without any uproar or tumult, just as it was already coming to pass.
3.16	We must, therefore, be on our guard, for the devil is after us, through his apostles, with all his craft and cunning.
3.17	Now, although it is true, and no one can deny, that the images are evil because they are abused, nevertheless we must not reject them on that account, nor condemn anything because it is abused.
3.18	That would result in utter confusion.
3.19	God has commanded us not to lift up our eyes to the sun, etc.
3.20	[Deut. 4:19], so that we may not worship them, for they are created to serve all nations.
3.21	But there are many people who worship the sun and the stars.
3.22	Shall we, therefore, attempt to pull the sun and stars from the skies?
3.23	No, we will not do it.
3.24	Again, wine and women bring many a man to misery and make a fool of him.
3.25	Shall we, therefore, kill all the women and pour out all the wine?
3.26	Again, gold and silver cause much evil; shall we, therefore, condemn them?
3.27	No, if we wanted to drive away our one worst enemy, who does us the most harm, we would have to kill ourselves, for we have no greater enemy than our own heart, just as Jeremiah says, "The heart of man is crooked," [Jer. 17:9] or, as I take the meaning, "always twisting to one side or the other."
3.28	And what good would that do us?
3.29	He who wants to blacken the devil must have good charcoal, for he too wears fine clothes and goes to the fair.
3.30	But I can catch him by asking him: Do you not place the images in the churches because you think it a special service to God? And when he says yes, as he must, you may conclude that what was meant as a service to God he has turned into idolatry by abusing the images; he eagerly sought what God has not commanded and neglected God's positive command, to help the neighbor.
3.31	But I have not yet caught him; he escapes me by saying: I help the poor too; can I not give to my neighbor and at the same time place images in churches?
3.32	That is not true—for who would not rather give his neighbor a gold coin than God a golden image!
3.33	No, he would not trouble himself about placing images in churches if he believed that God was not served by it.
3.34	Therefore I freely admit that images are neither here nor there, neither evil nor good; we may have them or not, as we please.
3.35	This trouble has been caused by you; the devil would not have accomplished it with me, for I cannot deny that it is possible to find someone to whom images are useful.
3.36	And if I were asked about it, I would confess that none of these things give offense to me, and if just one person were found on earth who used the images rightly, the devil would soon draw the conclusion against me: Why do you condemn what is still useful in worship?
3.37	This challenge I could not answer; he would have successfully defied me.
3.38	He would not have gotten nearly so far if I had been here.
3.39	He played a bold game and won, although it does no harm to the Word of God.
3.40	You wanted to paint the devil black, but forgot the charcoal and used chalk.
3.41	If you want to fight the devil, you must be well versed in the Scriptures and, besides, use them at the right time.
3.42	Let us proceed and speak of the eating of foods.
3.43	It is true that we are free to eat any kind of food: meat, fish, eggs, or butter.
3.44	No one can deny this.
3.45	God has given us this liberty.
3.46	That is true; nevertheless we must know how to use our liberty, and treat the weak brother differently from the stubborn one.
3.47	Observe, then, how you must use this liberty.
