0.1	Text: Luke 2:1-14. Now it came to pass in those days that there went out a decree from Caesar Augustus that all the world should be enrolled.
0.2	This was the first enrollment, made when Quirinius was governor of Syria.
0.3	And all went to enroll themselves, everyone to his own city.
0.4	And Joseph also went up from Galilee, out of the city of Nazareth, into Judea, to the city of David, which is called Bethlehem, because he was of the house and family of David, to enroll himself with Mary, who was betrothed to him and was great with child.
0.5	And it came to pass, while they were there, that the days were fulfilled for her to give birth.
0.6	And she gave birth to her firstborn son; and she wrapped him in swaddling clothes and laid him in a manger, because there was no room for them in the inn.
0.7	And in that same country there were shepherds staying in the field and keeping watch by night over their flock.
0.8	And an angel of the Lord stood by them, and the glory of the Lord shone round about them; and they were filled with fear.
0.9	And the angel said to them, Do not be afraid; for behold, I bring you good news of great joy which shall be for all the people: for to you is born this day in the city of David a Savior, who is Christ the Lord.
0.10	And this is the sign for you: you shall find a baby wrapped in swaddling clothes and lying in a manger.
0.11	And suddenly a multitude of the heavenly host was with the angel, praising God and saying, Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace among men with whom he is well pleased.
H:0.2	I. The Birth of Jesus
H:0.3	The Story of Jesus' Birth
0.12	1. It is written in Haggai 2:6-7 that God says: "I will shake the heavens, and the precious things of all nations shall come."
0.13	This is fulfilled today, for the heavens were shaken; that is, the angels in the heavens sang praises to God.
0.14	And the earth was shaken; that is, the people on the earth were stirred up, one traveling to this city, another to that, throughout the whole land, as the Gospel tells us.
0.15	It was not a violent, bloody uprising, but rather a peaceable one, awakened by God, who is the God of peace.
0.16	It is not to be understood that all the countries on earth were stirred up in this way, but only those under Roman rule, which did not include half of the whole earth.
0.17	However, no land was stirred up as was the land of Judea, which had been divided among the tribes of Israel, although at this time the land was inhabited mostly by the race of Judah, since the ten tribes led captive into Assyria never returned.
0.18	2. This taxing, enrollment, or census, says Luke, was the first; but in the Gospel according to Matthew 17:24, and in other places, we read that it was continued from time to time, so that they even demanded tribute of Christ and tempted him with the tribute money, Matthew
0.19	22:17. On the day of his suffering they also testified against him that he forbade giving tribute to Caesar.
0.20	The Jews did not like to pay tribute, and they submitted to the taxing unwillingly, maintaining that they were God's people and free from Caesar.
0.21	They had great disputes as to whether they were obliged to pay the tribute, but they could not help themselves and were compelled to submit.
0.22	For this reason they would have been pleased to draw Jesus into the dispute and bring him under the Roman jurisdiction.
0.23	This taxing was therefore nothing else but a general decree throughout the whole empire that every individual should pay a penny each year, and the officers who collected the tribute were called publicans, a word which in German is wrongly rendered as notorious sinners.
0.24	3. Observe how exact the Evangelist is in his statement that the birth of Christ occurred in the time of Caesar Augustus, and when Quirinius was governor of Syria, of which the land of Judea was a part, just as Austria is a part of the German land.
0.25	Since this was the very first taxing, it appears that this tribute had never been paid before, until just the time when Christ was to be born.
0.26	By this Jesus shows that his kingdom was not to be of an earthly character, nor to exercise worldly power and lordship, but that he, together with his parents, is subject to the authorities that are in place.
0.27	Since he comes at the time of the very first enrollment, he leaves no doubt about this; for had he wished to leave it in doubt, he might have chosen to be born under another enrollment, so that it might have been said that it just happened so, without any divine intent.
0.28	4. And had he not been willing to be submissive, he might have been born before any enrollment was decreed.
0.29	Since all the works of Jesus are precious teachings, this circumstance cannot be interpreted otherwise than that he, by divine counsel and purpose, will not exercise any worldly authority, but will be subject to it.
0.30	This, then, is the first rebuke to the pope's government and to everything of that character, which agrees with the kingdom of Christ as night does with day.
0.31	5. This Gospel is so clear that it requires very little explanation, but it should be well considered and taken deeply to heart; and no one will receive more benefit from it than those who, with a calm, quiet heart, banish everything else from their minds and diligently look into it.
0.32	It is just like the sun, which is reflected in calm water and gives out vigorous warmth, but which cannot be seen so readily, nor give out such warmth, in water that is in roaring and rapid motion.
0.33	Therefore, if you would be enlightened and warmed, if you would see the wonders of divine grace and have your heart aglow and enlightened, devout and joyful, go where you can silently meditate and lay hold of this picture deep in your heart, and you will see miracle upon miracle.
0.34	But to give the common person a start and a motive to contemplate it, we will illustrate it in part, and afterward enter into it more deeply.
0.35	6. First, see how very ordinary and common the things that take place on earth are to us, and yet how highly they are regarded in heaven.
0.36	On earth it happens in this way: here is a poor young woman, Mary of Nazareth, not highly esteemed, but one of the humblest citizens of the village.
0.37	No one is aware of the great wonder she bears; she is silent, keeps her own counsel, and regards herself as the lowliest in the town.
0.38	She sets out with her husband Joseph; very likely they had no servant, and he had to do the work of both master and servant, and she that of both mistress and maid. They were therefore obliged to leave their home unoccupied, or to commit it to the care of others.
0.39	7. Now they apparently owned a donkey, on which Mary rode, although the Gospel does not mention it, and it is possible that she went on foot with Joseph.
0.40	Imagine how she was despised at the inns and stopping places on the way, although she was worthy to ride in state in a chariot of gold.
0.41	There were, no doubt, many wives and daughters of prominent men at that time who lived in fine apartments and great splendor, while the mother of God makes a journey in midwinter under most trying circumstances.
0.42	What distinctions there are in the world!
0.43	It was more than a day's journey from Nazareth in Galilee to Bethlehem in the land of Judea.
0.44	They had to travel either by or through Jerusalem, for Bethlehem is south of Jerusalem, while Nazareth is north.
0.45	8. The Evangelist shows how, when they arrived at Bethlehem, they were the most insignificant and despised, so that they had to make way for others until they were obliged to take refuge in a stable and share with the cattle lodging, table, bedchamber and bed, while many a wicked man sat at the head of the table in the hotels and was honored as lord.
0.46	No one noticed or was aware of what God was doing in that stable.
0.47	He lets the large houses and costly apartments remain empty, and lets their inhabitants eat, drink and be merry; but this comfort and treasure are hidden from them.
0.48	O what a dark night this was for Bethlehem, which was not aware of that glorious light!
0.49	See how God shows that he utterly disregards what the world is, has or desires; and furthermore, how the world shows how little it knows or notices what God is, has and does.
0.50	9. See, this is the first picture with which Christ puts the world to shame and exposes all it does and knows.
0.51	It shows that the world's greatest wisdom is foolishness, her best actions are wrong, and her greatest treasures are misfortunes.
0.52	What did Bethlehem have when it did not have Christ?
0.53	What do they have now who at that time had enough?
0.54	What do Joseph and Mary lack now, although at that time they had no room to sleep comfortably?
0.55	10. Some have commented on the word "diversorium" as if it meant an open archway through which everybody could pass, where some donkeys stood, and as if Mary could not get to a lodging place.
0.56	This is not right.
0.57	The Evangelist wishes to show that Joseph and Mary had to occupy a stable because there was no room for her in the inn, the place where the traveling guests generally lodged.
0.58	All the guests were cared for in the inn or caravansary, with room, food and bed, except these poor people, who had to creep into a stable where it was customary to house cattle.
0.59	This word "diversorium," which Luke calls "katalyma," means nothing else than a place for guests, as is proved by the words of Christ in Luke 22:11, where he sent the disciples to prepare the supper: "Go and tell the master of the house, The Teacher asks you, Where is the guest chamber in which I am to eat the Passover with my disciples?"
0.60	So here also Joseph and Mary had no room in the katalyma, the inn, but only in the stable belonging to the innkeeper, who would not have been worthy to give shelter to such a guest.
0.61	They had neither money nor influence to secure a room in the inn; hence they were obliged to lodge in a stable.
0.62	O world, how stupid!
0.63	O man, how blind you are!
0.64	11. But the birth itself is still more pitiful.
0.65	There was no one to take pity on this young wife, who was to give birth to a child for the first time; no one to take to heart her condition, that she, a stranger, did not have the least thing a mother needs on the night of a birth.
0.66	There she is without any preparation, without either light or fire, alone in the darkness, without anyone offering her service, as it is customary for women to do at such times.
0.67	Everything in the inn is in commotion; there is a swarm of guests from all parts of the country; no one thinks of this poor woman.
0.68	It is also possible that she did not expect the event so soon; otherwise she would probably have remained at Nazareth.
0.69	12. Just imagine what kind of swaddling clothes they were in which she wrapped the child.
0.70	Possibly her veil, or some article of her clothing she could spare.
0.71	But that she should have wrapped him in Joseph's trousers, which are exhibited at Aix-la-Chapelle, appears entirely too false and frivolous.
0.72	It is a fable, and there are more like it in the world.
0.73	Is it not strange that the birth of Christ occurs in cold winter, in a strange land, and in such a poor and contemptible manner?
0.74	13. Some argue about how this birth took place, as if Jesus was born while Mary was praying and rejoicing, without any pain, and before she was aware of it.
0.75	While I do not altogether discard that pious supposition, it was evidently invented for the sake of simple-minded people.
0.76	But we must abide by the Gospel, that he was born of the virgin Mary.
0.77	There is no deception here, for the Word clearly states that it was an actual birth.
0.78	14. It is well known what is meant by giving birth.
0.79	Mary's experience was no different from that of other women, so that the birth of Christ was a real, natural birth, Mary being his natural mother and he being her natural son.
0.80	Therefore her body performed the functions of giving birth which naturally belonged to it, except that she brought forth without sin, without shame, without pain and without injury, just as she had conceived without sin.
0.81	The curse of Eve did not come upon her, where God said, "With pain you shall bear children," Genesis 3:16; otherwise it was with her in every particular as with every woman who gives birth to a child.
0.82	15. Grace does not interfere with nature and her work, but rather improves and promotes it.
0.83	Likewise Mary, without doubt, also nourished the child with milk from her own breast, and not with another's milk or in a manner different from that which nature provided, as we sing: ubere de coelo pleno, from her breast filled by heaven, without injury or impurity.
0.84	I mention this so that we may be grounded in the faith and know that Jesus was a natural man in every respect, just as we are, the only difference being in his relation to sin and grace, he being without a sinful nature.
0.85	In him and in his mother, nature was pure in all the members and in all the operations of those members.
0.86	No body or member of a woman ever performed its natural function without sin, except that of this virgin; here for once God bestowed special honor upon nature and its operations.
0.87	It is a great comfort to us that Jesus took upon himself our nature and flesh.
0.88	Therefore we are not to take away from him or his mother anything that is not in conflict with grace, for the text clearly says that she brought him forth, and the angels said, To you he is born.
0.89	16. How could God have shown his goodness in a more sublime manner than by humbling himself to partake of flesh and blood, so that he did not even scorn what nature keeps private, but honors nature most highly in that very part where, in Adam and Eve, it was most miserably brought to shame? so that from now on even that can be regarded as godly, honest and pure which in all men is the most ungodly, shameful and impure.
0.90	These are real miracles of God, for in no way could he have given us stronger, more forceful and purer pictures of chastity than in this birth.
0.91	When we look at this birth, and reflect upon how the sublime Majesty moves with great earnestness and inexpressible love and goodness upon the flesh and blood of this virgin, we see how here all evil lust and every evil thought is banished.
0.92	17. No woman can inspire such pure thoughts in a man as this virgin; nor can any man inspire such pure thoughts in a woman as this child.
0.93	If, in reflecting on this birth, we recognize the work of God that is embodied in it, only chastity and purity spring from it.
0.94	18. But what happens in heaven concerning this birth?
0.95	As much as it is despised on earth, so much and a thousand times more is it honored in heaven.
0.96	If an angel from heaven came and praised you and your work, would you not regard it as of greater value than all the praise and honor the world could give you, and for which you would be willing to bear the greatest humiliation and reproach?
0.97	What exalted honor is that, when all the angels in heaven cannot restrain themselves from breaking out in rejoicing, so that even poor shepherds in the fields hear them preach, praise God, sing and pour out their joy without measure?
0.98	Were not all the joy and honor realized at Bethlehem, yes, all the joy and honor experienced by all the kings and nobles on earth, to be regarded as mere dross and abomination, of which no one likes to think, when compared with the joy and glory displayed here?
0.99	19. See how very richly God honors those who are despised by men, and how very gladly he does it.
0.100	Here you see that his eyes look into the depths of humility, as it is written, "He sits above the cherubim" and looks into the depths.
0.101	Nor could the angels find princes or valiant men to whom to communicate the good news, but only unlearned laymen, the most humble people on earth.
0.102	Could they not have addressed the high priests, who, it was supposed, knew so much concerning God and the angels?
0.103	No, God chose poor shepherds, who, though they were of low esteem in the sight of men, were regarded in heaven as worthy of such great grace and honor.
0.104	20. See how utterly God overthrows that which is lofty!
0.105	And yet we rage and rant for nothing but this empty honor, as if we had no honor to seek in heaven; we continually step out of God's sight, so that he may not see us in the depths, into which he alone looks.
0.106	21. This has been considered sufficiently for plain people.
0.107	Everyone should ponder it further for himself.
0.108	If every word is properly grasped, it is like fire that sets the heart aglow, as God says in Jeremiah 23:29, "Is my Word not like fire?"
0.109	And as we see, it is the purpose of the divine Word to teach us to know God and his work, and to see that this life is nothing.
0.110	For as he does not live according to this life, and has neither possessions nor temporal honor and power, he pays no regard to these things and says nothing concerning them, but teaches only the contrary.
0.111	He works in opposition to these temporal things, looks with favor upon that from which the world turns away, teaches that from which it flees, and takes up that which it discards.
0.112	22. And although we are not willing to tolerate such acts of God, and do not want to receive blessing, honor and life in this way, yet it must remain so.
0.113	God does not change his purpose, nor does he teach or act otherwise than he has purposed.
0.114	We must adapt ourselves to him; he will not adapt himself to us.
0.115	Moreover, he who will not regard his word, nor the manner in which he works to bring comfort to men, assuredly has no good evidence of being saved.
0.116	In what lovelier manner could he have shown his grace to the humble and despised of the earth than through this birth in poverty, over which the angels rejoice, and which they make known to no one but the poor shepherds?
0.117	23. Let us now look at the mysteries set before us in this history.
0.118	In all the mysteries here two things are especially set forth, the Gospel and faith; that is, what is to be preached and what is to be believed, who are to be the preachers and who are to be the believers.
0.119	This we will now consider.
H:0.31	II. The Birth of Jesus Considered in Its Spiritual Meaning
H:0.32	A. The Teaching Concerning Faith
0.120	24. Faith is first, and it is right that we recognize it as the most important thing in every word of God.
0.121	It is of no value merely to believe that this history is true as it is written; for all sinners, even the condemned, believe that.
0.122	The Scripture, God's Word, does not teach concerning faith that it is a natural work, without grace.
0.123	The right and gracious faith which God demands is that you firmly believe that Christ is born for you, and that this birth took place for your welfare.
0.124	The Gospel teaches that Christ was born, and that he did and suffered everything on our behalf, as is declared here by the angel: "Behold, I bring you good news of great joy which shall be for all the people; for to you is born this day a Savior, who is Christ the Lord."
0.125	In these words you clearly see that he is born for us.
0.126	25. He does not simply say, Christ is born, but, To you he is born; nor does he say, I bring good news, but, To you I bring good news of great joy.
0.127	Furthermore, this joy was not to remain in Christ, but it shall be for all the people.
0.128	This faith no condemned or wicked man has, nor can he have it; for the right ground of salvation, which unites Christ and the believing heart, is that they have all things in common.
0.129	But what do they have?
0.130	26. Christ has a pure, innocent and holy birth.
0.131	Man has an unclean, sinful, condemned birth; as David says in Psalm 51:5, "Behold, I was born in iniquity, and my mother conceived me in sin."
0.132	Nothing can help this unholy birth except the pure birth of Christ.
0.133	But Christ's birth cannot be distributed in a material sense, nor would that avail anything; it is therefore imparted spiritually, through the Word, as the angel says; it is given to all who firmly believe, so that no harm will come to them because of their impure birth.
0.134	This is the way and manner in which we are to be cleansed from the miserable birth we have from Adam.
0.135	For this purpose Christ willed to be born, that through him we might be born again, as he says in John 3:3, and that this takes place through faith; as St. James also says in James 1:18: "Of his own will he brought us forth through the word of truth, so that we would be, as it were, firstfruits of his creatures."
0.136	27. We see here how Christ, as it were, takes our birth from us and absorbs it in his birth, and grants us his, so that in it we might become pure and holy, as if it were our own, so that every Christian may rejoice and glory in Christ's birth as much as if he himself had been born of Mary, as Christ was.
0.137	Whoever does not believe this, or doubts it, is no Christian.
0.138	28. O, this is the great joy of which the angel speaks.
0.139	This is the comfort and exceeding goodness of God, that if a man believes this, he can boast of the treasure that Mary is his rightful mother, Christ his brother, and God his father.
0.140	For these things actually occurred and are true, but we must believe.
0.141	This is the principal thing and the principal treasure in every Gospel, before any doctrine of good works can be drawn out of it.
0.142	Christ must above all things become our own, and we become his, before we can do good works.
0.143	But this cannot occur except through the faith that teaches us rightly to understand the Gospel and properly to lay hold of it.
0.144	This is the only way in which Christ can be rightly known, so that the conscience is satisfied and made to rejoice.
0.145	Out of this grow love and praise to God, who in Christ has bestowed upon us such unspeakable gifts.
0.146	This gives courage to do or to leave undone, and, living or dying, to suffer everything that is well pleasing to God.
0.147	This is what is meant by Isaiah 9:6, "For us a child is born, for us a son is given": to us, to us, to us is born, and to us is given this child.
0.148	29. Therefore see to it that you do not find pleasure in the Gospel only as a history, for that is only transient; nor regard it only as an example, for it is of no value without faith; but see to it that you make this birth your own and that Christ is born in you.
0.149	This will be the case if you believe; then you will rest in the lap of the virgin Mary and be her dear child.
0.150	But you must exercise this faith and pray as long as you live; you cannot establish it too firmly.
0.151	This is our foundation and inheritance, upon which good works must be built.
0.152	30. If Christ has now thus become your own, and you have by such faith been cleansed through him and have received your inheritance without any personal merit, but through the love of God alone, who gives you as your own the treasure and work of his Son, it follows that you will do good works by doing to your neighbor as Christ has done to you.
0.153	Here good works are their own teacher.
0.154	What are the good works of Christ?
0.155	Is it not true that they are good because they have been done for your benefit, for the sake of God, who commanded him to do the works on your behalf?
0.156	In this, then, Christ was obedient to the Father, in that he loved and served us.
0.157	31. Therefore, since you have received enough and become rich, you have no other commandment by which to serve Christ and render obedience to him than so to direct your works that they may be of benefit to your neighbor, just as the works of Christ are of benefit and use to you.
0.158	For this reason Jesus said at the Last Supper: "This is my commandment: that you love one another, even as I have loved you."
0.159	John 13:34. Here it is seen that he loved us and did everything for our benefit, in order that we may do the same, not to him, for he does not need it, but to our neighbor; this is his commandment, and this is our obedience.
0.160	Therefore it is through faith that Christ becomes our own, and his love is the cause that we are his.
0.161	He loves, we believe; thus both are united into one.
0.162	Again, our neighbor believes in and expects our love; we are therefore to love him also in return, and not let him long for it in vain.
0.163	The one is the same as the other: as Christ helps us, so we in return help our neighbor, and all have enough.
0.164	32. Observe now from this how far those have gone out of the way who have bound good works to stone, wood, clothing, eating and drinking.
0.165	Of what benefit is it to your neighbor if you build a church entirely of gold?
0.166	Of what benefit to him is the frequent ringing of great church bells?
0.167	Of what benefit to him are the glitter and the ceremonies in the churches, the priests' gowns, the sanctuary, the silver pictures and vessels?
0.168	Of what benefit to him are the many candles and all the incense?
0.169	Of what benefit to him is all the chanting and mumbling, the singing of vigils and masses?
0.170	Do you think that God will allow himself to be paid with the sound of bells, the smoke of candles, the glitter of gold and such fancies?
0.171	He has commanded none of these; but if you see your neighbor going astray, sinning, or suffering in body or soul, you are to leave everything else and at once help him in every way in your power, and if you can do no more, help him with words of comfort and prayer.
0.172	Thus Christ has done to you, and has given you an example for you to follow.
0.173	33. These are the two things in which a Christian is to exercise himself: the one, that he draws Christ into himself, and by faith makes him his own, appropriates to himself the treasures of Christ and confidently builds upon them; the other, that he condescends to his neighbor and lets him share in what he has received, even as he shares in the treasures of Christ.
0.174	He who does not exercise himself in these two things will receive no benefit, even if he should fast to death, suffer torture, or even give his body to be burned, and were able to do all miracles, as St. Paul teaches in 1 Corinthians 13ff.
H:0.44	B. The Spiritual Meaning of the Doctrine of This Gospel
0.175	34. The other mystery, or spiritual teaching, is that in the churches the Gospel only should be preached, and nothing more.
0.176	Now it is evident that the Gospel teaches nothing but the foregoing two things, Christ and his example, and two kinds of good works: the one belonging to Christ, by which we are saved through faith; the other belonging to us, by which our neighbor receives help.
0.177	Whoever therefore teaches anything different from the Gospel leads people astray; and whoever does not teach the Gospel in these two parts leads people all the more astray, and is worse than the former who teaches without the Gospel, because he abuses and corrupts God's Word, as St. Paul complains concerning some.
0.178	2 Corinthians 2:17.
0.179	35. Now it is clear that nature could not have discovered such a doctrine, nor could all the ingenuity, reason and wisdom of the world have thought it out.
0.180	Who would be able to discover by his own efforts that faith in Christ makes us one with Christ and gives us as our own all that is Christ's?
0.181	Who would be able to discover that no works are of any value except those intended to benefit our neighbor?
0.182	Nature teaches no more than what is accomplished by the law.
0.183	Therefore it falls back upon its own work, so that this one thinks he fulfills the commandment by founding some institution or order, that one by fasting, this one by the kind of clothes he wears, that one by going on pilgrimages; this one in this manner, that one in that manner; and yet all their works are worthless, for no one is helped by them.
0.184	Such is the case at the present time, in which the whole world is blinded and is going astray through the doctrines and works of men, so that faith and love, along with the Gospel, have perished.
0.185	36. Therefore the Gospel, properly understood, is a supernatural sermon and light which makes known Christ only.
0.186	This is pointed out first of all by the fact that it was not a man who made it known to others, but an angel who came down from heaven and made known to the shepherds the birth of Jesus, while no human being knew anything about it.
0.187	37. In the second place, it is pointed out by the fact that Christ was born at midnight, by which he indicates that all the world is in darkness as to its future, and that Christ cannot be known by mere reason, but that knowledge concerning him must be revealed from heaven.
0.188	38. In the third place, it is shown by the light that shone around the shepherds, which teaches that here there must be an entirely different light from that of human reason.
0.189	Moreover, when St. Luke says Gloria Dei, the glory of God, shone around them, he calls that light a brightness, or the glory of God.
0.190	Why does he say that?
0.191	In order to call attention to the mystery and reveal the character of the Gospel.
0.192	For while the Gospel is a heavenly light that teaches nothing more than Christ, in whom God's grace is given to us and all human merit is entirely cast aside, it exalts only the glory of God, so that from now on no one may be able to boast of his own power, but must give God the glory, that it is of his love and goodness alone that we are saved through Christ.
0.193	See, the divine honor, the divine glory, is the light in the Gospel, which shines around us from heaven through the apostles and their followers who preach the Gospel.
0.194	The angel here was in the place of all the preachers of the Gospel, and the shepherds in the place of all the hearers, as we shall see.
0.195	For this reason the Gospel can tolerate no other teaching besides its own; for the teaching of men is earthly light and human glory; it exalts the honor and praise of men, and makes souls glory in their own works; while the Gospel glories in Christ, in God's grace and goodness, and teaches us to boast of and confide in Christ.
0.196	39. In the fourth place, this is represented by the names Judea and Bethlehem, where Christ chose to be born.
0.197	Judea is interpreted as confession or thanksgiving, as when we confess, praise and thank God, acknowledging that all we possess are his gifts.
0.198	One who so confesses and praises is called Judaeus.
0.199	Such a king of the Jews is Christ, as the expression goes:"Jesus Nazarenus Rex Judaeorum," Jesus the Nazarene, the king of the Jews, that is, of those confessing God.
0.200	By this it is shown that no teaching whatever can produce such a confession except the Gospel, which teaches Christ.
0.201	40. Beth means house; Lehem means bread; Bethlehem, a house of bread.
0.202	The city had that name because it was situated in a good, fruitful country, rich in grain, so that it was the granary for the neighboring towns, or, as we would call it, a fertile country.
0.203	In olden times the name of the city was Ephrata, which means fruitful.
0.204	Both names imply that the city was in a fruitful and rich land.
0.205	By this it is represented that without the Gospel this earth is a wilderness, and there is no confession of God nor thanksgiving.
0.206	41. Moreover, where Christ and the Gospel are, there is the fruitful Bethlehem and the thankful Judea.
0.207	There everyone has enough in Christ, and overflows with thanksgiving for the divine grace.
0.208	But while men are thankful for human teachings, these cannot satisfy, but leave a barren land and deadly hunger.
0.209	No heart can ever be satisfied unless it hears Christ rightly proclaimed in the Gospel.
0.210	In this a man comes to Bethlehem and finds him; he also comes to Judea and remains there, and thanks his God eternally; here he is satisfied, here God receives his praise and confession, while outside the Gospel there is nothing but thanklessness and starvation.
0.211	42. But the angel shows most clearly that nothing is to be preached in Christendom except the Gospel; he takes upon himself the office of a preacher of the Gospel.
0.212	He does not say, I preach to you, but, "Good news I bring to you."
0.213	I am an Evangelist, and my word is an evangel, good news.
0.214	The meaning of the word Gospel is a good, joyful message that is preached in the New Testament.
0.215	Of what does the Gospel testify?
0.216	Listen! The angel says, "I bring you good news of great joy"; my Gospel speaks of great joy.
0.217	Where is it? Hear again: "For to you is born this day in the city of David a Savior, who is Christ the Lord."
0.218	43. Behold here what the Gospel is, namely, a joyful sermon concerning Christ, our Savior.
0.219	Whoever preaches him rightly preaches the Gospel of pure joy.
0.220	How is it possible for a man to hear of greater joy than that Christ has been given to him as his own?
0.221	He does not only say, Christ is born, but he makes his birth our own by saying, To you a Savior.
0.222	44. Therefore the Gospel does not only teach the history concerning Christ, but it enables all who believe it to receive it as their own, which is the way the Gospel works, as has just been set forth.
0.223	Of what benefit would it be to me if Christ had been born a thousand times, and it were sung into my ears daily in the loveliest manner, if I were never to hear that he was born for me and was to be my very own?
0.224	If the voice gives forth this pleasant sound, even if it is in simple words, my heart listens with joy, for it is a lovely sound which penetrates the soul.
0.225	If there were now anything else to be preached, the evangelical angel and the angelic evangelist would certainly have touched upon it.
H:0.57	C. The Spiritual Meaning of the Signs, the Angel, and the Shepherds
0.226	45. The angel says further: "And this is the sign for you: you shall find the baby wrapped in swaddling clothes and lying in a manger."
0.227	The clothes are nothing else than the holy Scriptures, in which the Christian truth lies wrapped, and in which the faith is described.
0.228	For the Old Testament contains nothing else than Christ as he is preached in the Gospel.
0.229	Therefore we see how the apostles appeal to the testimony of the Scriptures and with them prove everything that is to be preached and believed concerning Christ.
0.230	Thus St. Paul says in Romans 3:21 that the faith of Christ, through which we become righteous, is witnessed by the law and the prophets.
0.231	And Christ himself, after his resurrection, opened to them the Scriptures which speak of him.
0.232	Luke 24:27.
0.233	When he was transfigured on the mountain, Matthew
0.234	17:3, Moses and Elijah stood by him; that means the law and the prophets as his two witnesses, which are signs pointing to him.
0.235	Therefore the angel says that the sign by which he is recognized is the swaddling clothes, for there is no other testimony on earth concerning Christian truth than the holy Scriptures.
0.236	46. Accordingly, Christ's seamless coat, which was not divided and which during his sufferings was gambled for and given away, John 19:23-24, represents the New Testament.
0.237	It indicates that the pope, the Antichrist, would not deny the Gospel, but would shut it up by force and play with it by means of false interpretation, until Christ is no longer to be found in it.
0.238	Then the four soldiers who crucified the Lord are figures of all the bishops and teachers in the four quarters of the earth, who violently suppress the Gospel and destroy Christ and his faith by means of their human teachings, as the pope with his Papists has long since done.
