3.48	First of all, if you cannot give up meat without harm to yourself, or if you are sick, you may eat whatever you like, and if anyone takes offense, let him be offended.
3.49	And if the whole world took offense, you would still not be committing a sin, for God can excuse you in view of the liberty He has so graciously given you, and of the needs of your health, which would be endangered by your abstaining.
3.50	Secondly, if you should be pressed to eat fish instead of meat on Friday, and to eat fish and abstain from eggs and butter during Lent, etc., as the pope has done with his fools' laws, then you must in no way allow yourself to be drawn away from the liberty in which God has placed you, but do just the opposite to spite him, and say: Because you forbid me to eat meat, and presume to turn my liberty into law, I will eat meat in spite of you.
3.51	And you must do the same in all other things that are matters of liberty.
3.52	To give you an example: If the pope, or anyone else, would force me to wear a cowl, just as he prescribes it, I would take off the cowl just to spite him.
3.53	But since it is left to my own free choice, I wear it or take it off, as I please.
3.54	Thirdly, there are some who are still weak in faith, who ought to be instructed, and who would gladly believe as we do.
3.55	But their ignorance prevents them, and if this were faithfully preached to them, as it was to us, they would be one with us.
3.56	Toward such well-meaning people we must take an entirely different attitude from the one we take toward the stubborn.
3.57	We must bear patiently with them and not use our liberty, since this brings no danger or harm to body or soul; indeed, it is rather wholesome, and we are doing our brothers and sisters a great service besides.
3.58	But if we use our liberty without need, and deliberately cause offense to our neighbor, we drive away the very one who in time would come to our faith.
3.59	So St. Paul circumcised Timothy because simple-minded Jews had taken offense [Acts 16:3]; he thought, What harm can it do, since they are offended because of their ignorance?
3.60	But when, in Antioch, they insisted that he ought to and must circumcise Titus, Paul withstood them all and, to spite them, would not have Titus circumcised [Gal. 2:3].
3.61	And he held his ground.
3.62	He did the same when St. Peter, by the exercise of his liberty, caused a wrong idea in the minds of the unlearned [Gal. 2:11ff.].
3.63	It happened in this way: When Peter was with the Gentiles, he ate pork and sausage with them, but when the Jews came in, he would not touch this food and no longer ate with them.
3.64	Then the Gentiles who had become Christians thought: Alas! We, too, must be like the Jews, eat no pork and live according to the law of Moses.
3.65	But when Paul saw that it would injure the liberty of the Gospel, he rebuked Peter publicly and read him an apostolic lecture, saying: "If you, being a Jew, live after the manner of the Gentiles, why do you compel the Gentiles to live as the Jews do?"
3.66	[Gal. 2:14] So we, too, should order our lives and use our liberty at the proper time, so that Christian liberty may suffer no injury, and no offense be given to our weak brothers and sisters who are still without the knowledge of this liberty.
T:4	The Fifth Sermon: A Sermon on the Sacrament (Thursday after Invocavit)
4.1	We have heard about the things that are necessary, such as the mass, which is regarded as a sacrifice, and about the unnecessary things, such as monks leaving the monasteries, the marriage of priests, and the images.
4.2	We have seen how we must treat these matters: that no compulsion or law must be made of them, and that no one shall be dragged from them by the hair, but that we must let the Word of God alone do the work.
4.3	Let us now consider how we must observe the blessed sacrament.
4.4	You have heard how I preached against the foolish law of the pope and opposed his rule that no woman shall wash the altar linen on which the body of Christ has lain, even if she is a pure nun, unless it has first been washed by a pure priest.
4.5	Likewise, when anyone touches the body of Christ with his hand, the priests come running and scrape his fingers, and much more of the same sort.
4.6	But when a priest is unchaste, the pope winks at it.
4.7	If the woman bears a child, he lets that pass, too.
4.8	The altar linen and the sacrament, however, must not be touched.
4.9	Against such fools' laws we have preached, and have shown that no sin is involved in these foolish prescriptions of the pope, and that a layman does not commit sin if he touches the cup or the body of Christ with his hands.
4.10	You should give thanks to God that you have come to such clear knowledge, which many great men have lacked.
4.11	But now you have become just as foolish as the pope, with your notion that you must handle the sacrament; you would prove that you are good Christians by touching the sacrament with your hands.
4.12	You have dealt with the sacrament, our highest treasure, in such a way that it is a wonder you were not struck down by thunder and lightning.
4.13	The other things God would have allowed you to do, but to make this a matter of compulsion—
4.14	this He can in no way tolerate.
4.15	And if you do not turn back from this, neither the emperor nor anyone else needs to drive me away from you; I will go without being urged. Indeed, I dare say that none of my enemies, although they have caused me much sorrow, have wounded me as you have wounded me in this matter.
4.16	If you would show that you are good Christians by handling the sacrament, and boast of it before everybody, then Herod and Pilate are indeed the chief and best Christians.
4.17	It seems to me they handled the body of Christ when they had Him nailed to the cross and put to death.
4.18	No, my dear friends, the kingdom of God consists not in outward things, which can be touched or perceived, but in faith [Luke 17:20].
4.19	But you may say: We live and should live according to the Scriptures, and God instituted the sacrament in such a way that we should take it with our hands, for He said: "Take and eat, this is My body."
4.20	[Matt. 26:26] Answer: Though I am convinced beyond a doubt that the disciples of the Lord took it with their hands, and though I admit that you may do the same without committing sin, nevertheless I can neither make it compulsory nor prove that it is the only way.
4.21	And my reason for this is as follows: when the devil, in his pursuit of us, argues, "Where have you read in the Scriptures that 'take' means 'seizing with the hands'?"—how shall I prove or defend it?
4.22	No, how will I answer him when he cites from the Scriptures the very opposite, and proves that "take" does not mean to receive with the hands only, but also to convey to ourselves in other ways?
4.23	"See, my good fellow," he says, "how the word 'take' is used by three Evangelists in describing how the Lord took the gall and vinegar [Matt. 27:34; Mark 15:23; Luke 23:26].
4.24	You must admit that the Lord did not touch or handle it with His hands, for His hands were nailed to the cross."
4.25	This verse is a strong argument against me.
4.26	Again, he cites the passage: Et accepit omnes timor—"And fear took hold of all" [Luke 7:16]—where again we must admit that fear has no hands.
4.27	So I am driven into a corner and must concede, even against my will, that "take" means not only to receive with the hands, but to convey to myself in any other way in which it can be done.
4.28	So you see, dear friends, we must stand on firm ground if we are to withstand the devil's attack.
4.29	Although I must acknowledge that you committed no sin when you touched the sacrament with your hands, nevertheless I must tell you that it was not a good work, because it caused offense everywhere.
4.30	For the universal custom is to receive the blessed sacrament directly from the hands of the priest.
4.31	Why will you not serve those who are weak in the faith in this matter also, and abstain from your liberty?
4.32	It does not help you if you do it, nor harm you if you do not.
4.33	Therefore no new practices should be introduced unless the Gospel has first been thoroughly preached and understood, as it has been among you.
4.34	For this reason, dear friends, let us deal soberly and wisely in the things that pertain to God, for God will not be mocked.
4.35	You may mock the saints, but with God it is vastly different.
4.36	Therefore, I beg you, give up this practice.
4.37	Let us now speak of the two kinds.
4.38	Although I hold that it is necessary that the sacrament be received in both kinds, according to the Lord's institution, nevertheless it must not be made compulsory or a general law.
4.39	We must occupy ourselves with the Word, practice it and preach it.
4.40	For the result we should look entirely to the Word, and let everyone have his liberty in this matter.
4.41	Where that is not done, the sacrament becomes an outward observance and a hypocrisy, which is just what the devil wants.
4.42	But when the Word is given free course and is not bound to any observance, it takes hold of one person today and falls into his heart; tomorrow it touches another, and so on.
4.43	So it will do its work quietly and soberly, and no one will know how it all came about.
4.44	I was glad when someone wrote to me that some people in this city had begun to receive the sacrament in both kinds.
4.45	You should have let it remain so and not have forced it into a law.
4.46	But now you go at it pell-mell, and headlong force everyone into it.
4.47	Dear friends, you will not succeed that way.
4.48	And if you want to be regarded as better Christians than others because you take the sacrament into your hands and receive it in both kinds, you are really poor Christians indeed!
4.49	In this way even a sow could be a Christian, for she has a big enough snout to receive the sacrament outwardly.
4.50	We must deal soberly with such high things.
4.51	Dear friends, this must be no mockery, and if you would listen to me, give it up.
4.52	If you will not listen to me, no one needs to drive me away from you—I will leave you unbidden, and I shall regret that I ever preached so much as one sermon in this place.
4.53	The other things could be passed over, but this cannot be passed over; you have gone so far that people say: "At Wittenberg there are very good Christians, for they take the sacrament with their hands and handle the cup, and then they go to their brandy and drink until they are drunk."
4.54	In this way the weak and simple-minded are driven away, who would come to us if as much instruction had been given to them as was given to us.
4.55	But if there is anyone so stupid that he must touch the sacrament with his hands, let him have it brought home to his house and there let him handle it to his heart's content.
4.56	But in public let him abstain, since that will do him no harm, and the offense will be avoided that is caused to our brothers, sisters and neighbors, who are now so angry with us that they are ready to kill us.
4.57	I may say that none of the enemies who have opposed me until now have brought so much grief upon me as you have.
4.58	This is enough for today; we shall continue tomorrow.
T:5	The Sixth Sermon (Friday after Invocavit)
5.1	In our discussion of the chief things we have come to the reception of the sacrament, which we have not yet finished.
5.2	Today we shall see how we must conduct ourselves here, and also who is worthy to receive the sacrament and who belongs there.
5.3	It is very necessary here that your hearts and consciences be well instructed, so that you distinguish well between the outward reception and the inner, spiritual reception.
5.4	This is the bodily and outward reception: when a man receives the body of Christ and His blood with his mouth.
5.5	Anyone can receive the sacrament in this way, for such reception may be without faith and love.
5.6	But that reception does not make a man a Christian, for if it did, even a mouse would be a Christian, for it too can eat the bread and drink out of the cup.
5.7	It is such a simple thing to do.
5.8	But the true, inner, spiritual reception is a very different thing, for it consists in the right use of the sacrament and of its fruits.
5.9	I would say in the first place that such reception is the true inner one, and is a reception in faith.
5.10	We Christians have no other outward sign by which we may be distinguished from others than this sacrament and baptism; but a mere outward reception, without faith, amounts to nothing.
5.11	There must be faith to make one well prepared for the reception and acceptable before God; otherwise it is all sham and mere outward show, which is not Christianity at all.
5.12	Christianity is a matter of faith, which is never bound to any outward work.
5.13	But faith (which we all must have if we wish to go to the sacrament worthily) is a firm trust that Christ, the Son of God, stands in our place and has taken all our sins upon His shoulders, that He is the eternal satisfaction for our sin and reconciles us with God the Father.
5.14	He who has this faith belongs to this sacrament, and neither devil nor hell nor sin can harm him.
5.15	Do you ask why?
5.16	Because God is his protector and defender.
5.17	And when I have this faith, then I am certain that God is fighting for me; I can defy devil, death, hell and sin, and all the harm with which they threaten me.
5.18	This is the great, priceless treasure given us in Christ, which human words cannot describe.
5.19	Only faith can take hold of the heart, and not everyone has such faith.
5.20	Therefore this sacrament must not be made a law, as the most holy father, the pope, has done with his fools' commandment: All Christians must go to the sacrament at holy Eastertide, and whoever does not go shall not be buried in consecrated ground.
5.21	Is it not a foolish law that the pope has set up?
5.22	You ask why? Because we are not all alike; we do not all have equal faith; the faith of one is stronger than that of another.
5.23	It is therefore impossible for the sacrament to be made a law, and the greatest sins are committed at Easter solely because of this unchristian command, which would drive everybody to the sacrament.
5.24	And if all robbery, usury, unchastity and all the other sins were thrown onto one great heap, this sin would tower above it—even at the time and place of seemingly greatest silliness.
5.25	And why? Because the pope can look into no one's heart to see whether he has faith or not.
5.26	But if you believe that God is with you and stakes all His treasures and His blood for you, as if He said: Fall in behind Me without fear or delay, and then let come what may to try to harm you; let devil, death, sin and hell and all creation try it; I shall go before you, for I will be your captain and your shield; trust Me and rely on Me completely—he who believes this way cannot be harmed by devil, hell, sin or death; if God fights for him, what can you do to him?
5.27	He who has such faith is fit for the altar and receives the sacrament as an assurance, or seal, or sign to assure him of God's promises and grace.
5.28	But such faith we do not all have; would to God one-tenth of Christians had it!
5.29	See, such rich, immeasurable treasures, which God in His grace showers upon us, cannot be the possession of everyone, but only of those who suffer either bodily or spiritual adversity: the bodily through the persecution of men, and the spiritual through despair of conscience; outwardly or inwardly, when the devil makes your heart weak, timid and discouraged, so that you do not know how you stand with God, and when he reproaches you with your sins.
5.30	And in such terrified and trembling hearts alone God desires to dwell, as the prophet Isaiah says [Isa. 66:2].
5.31	For he who has not felt the battle within him, is not distressed by his sins nor has a daily quarrel with them, and wishes for no protector, defender and shield to stand before him, is not yet ready for this food.
5.32	This food demands a hungering and longing man, for it delights to enter a hungering soul, one that is in constant battle with its sins and eager to be rid of them.
5.33	He who is not prepared in this way should abstain from this sacrament for a while, for this food is not for a satisfied and full heart, and if it comes to such a heart, it is harmful.
5.34	Therefore, if we think about and feel within us such distress of conscience and the fear of a timid heart, we shall come with all humility and reverence, and not rush to it pell-mell, with insolence and without fear and humility.
5.35	We are not always fit for it; today I have the grace and am fit for it, but not tomorrow; indeed, it may be that for six months I have no desire or fitness for it.
5.36	Therefore those are the most worthy who are constantly troubled by death and the devil, and they receive it most fittingly, to remind them and strengthen them in the faith that no harm can come to them, for He is now with them, from Whom no one can take them away; let death or devil or sin come, they cannot harm them.
5.37	This is what Christ did when He prepared to institute the blessed sacrament.
5.38	He brought anguish upon His disciples and trembling to their hearts when He said that He would go away from them [Matt. 26:2], and again they were tormented when He said: One of you shall betray Me [Matt. 26:21].
5.39	Do you not think that cut them to the heart?
5.40	Truly, they received the word with all fear, and sat there as though they were all traitors to God.
5.41	And only after He had made them all tremble with fear and sorrow did He institute the blessed sacrament as a comfort, and consoled them again.
5.42	For this bread is a comfort for the sorrowing, a healing for the sick, a life for the dying, a food for all the hungry, and a rich treasure for all the poor and needy.
5.43	Let this be enough for now concerning the proper use of this sacrament.
5.44	I commend you to God.
T:6	The Seventh Sermon (Saturday before Reminiscere)
6.1	Yesterday we heard about the use of the holy and blessed sacrament and saw who are worthy to receive it: those in whom is the fear of death, who have timid and despairing consciences and who live in fear of hell.
6.2	All such come prepared to partake of this food for the strengthening of their weak faith and the comforting of their conscience.
6.3	This is the true and right use of this sacrament, and whoever does not find himself in this state, let him refrain from coming until God also takes hold of him and draws him through His Word.
6.4	We shall now speak of the fruit of this sacrament, which is love; that is, that we should treat our neighbor just as God has treated us.
6.5	Now we have received from God nothing but love and favor, for Christ has pledged and given us His righteousness and everything that He has, and has poured out upon us all His treasures, which no man can measure and no angel can understand or fathom, for God is a glowing furnace of love, reaching even from the earth to the heavens.
6.6	Love, I say, is a fruit of this sacrament.
6.7	But I do not yet see it among you here in Wittenberg, although there is much preaching of love and you ought to practice it above all other things.
6.8	This is the principal thing, and it alone is fitting for a Christian.
6.9	But no one shows eagerness for this, and you want to do all sorts of unnecessary things, which are of no account.
6.10	If you do not want to show yourselves Christians by your love, then leave the other things undone too, for St. Paul says in 1 Corinthians, "If I speak with the tongues of men and of angels, and do not have love, I am like sounding brass or a tinkling cymbal."
6.11	[1 Cor. 13:1] This is a terrible saying of Paul's.
6.12	And further: "And though I have the gift of prophecy, and understand all the mysteries of God, and all knowledge; and though I have all faith, so that I could move mountains, and do not have love, I am nothing.
6.13	And if I give away all my goods to feed the poor, and if I give my body to be burned, but do not have love, it profits me nothing."
6.14	[1 Cor. 13:2–3] You have not got as far as that, although you have received great and rich gifts from God, especially a knowledge of the Scriptures.
6.15	It is true, you have the pure Gospel and the true Word of God, but no one as yet has given his goods to the poor, no one has yet been burned, and even these things would profit nothing without love.
6.16	You would take all of God's goods in the sacrament, and yet not pour them out again in love.
6.17	No one will lend another a helping hand, no one thinks first of another, but everyone looks out for himself and his own gain, seeks only his own and lets everything else go as it will—if anybody is helped, well and good.
6.18	No one looks after the poor or seeks how to help them.
6.19	It is pitiful. You have heard many sermons about it, and all my books are full of it and have the one purpose, to urge you to faith and love.
6.20	And if you will not love one another, God will send a great plague upon you; let this be a warning to you, for God will not reveal His Word and have it preached in vain.
6.21	You are tempting God too far, my friends.
6.22	If someone in times past had preached the Word to our forefathers, they would perhaps have acted differently.
6.23	Or if the Word were preached today to many poor children in the cloisters, they would receive it with much greater joy than you.
6.24	You do not heed it at all, and give yourselves to other things, which are unnecessary and foolish.
6.25	I commend you to God.
T:7	The Eighth Sermon: A Short Summary of the Sermon of Dr. M. Luther Delivered on Reminiscere Sunday on Private Confession
7.1	Now we have heard all the things that ought to be considered here, except confession.
7.2	Of this we shall speak now.
7.3	In the first place, there is a confession which is founded on the Scriptures; namely, when someone commits a sin publicly, or with other people's knowledge, and is accused before the congregation.
7.4	If he abandons his sin, they intercede for him with God.
7.5	But if he will not listen to the congregation, he is excluded from the church and cast out, so that no one will have anything to do with him.
7.6	And this confession is commanded by God in Matthew 18: "If your brother trespasses against you (so that you and others are offended), go and tell him his fault, just between you and him alone."
7.7	[Matt. 18:15] Of this confession there is no longer even a trace to be found, and in this respect the Gospel is set aside in this place.
7.8	Whoever could reestablish it would perform a good work.
7.9	Here is where you ought to have taken pains and reestablished this kind of confession, and let the other things go.
7.10	For by this no one would have been offended, and it would have been accomplished without disturbance.
7.11	It should be done in this way: When you see a usurer, adulterer, thief or drunkard, you should go to him in secret and admonish him to give up his sin.
7.12	If he will not listen, you should take two others with you and admonish him once more, in a brotherly way, to give up his sin.
7.13	But if he scorns that, you should tell the pastor before the whole congregation, have your witnesses with you, and accuse him before the pastor in the presence of the people, saying: "Dear pastor, this man has done this and that, and would not receive our brotherly admonition to give up his sin.
7.14	Therefore I accuse him, together with my witnesses who were present."
7.15	And then, if he will not give up and willingly acknowledge his guilt, the pastor should exclude him and put him under the ban before the whole assembly, for the sake of the congregation, until he comes to himself and is received back again.
7.16	This would be Christian.
7.17	But I cannot undertake to carry it out single-handedly.
7.18	Secondly, a confession is necessary for us when we go away into a corner by ourselves, and confess to God Himself and pour out all our faults before Him.
7.19	And this confession is also commanded.
7.20	From this comes the familiar word of Scripture: "Facite judicium et justitiam" (Do judgment and righteousness).
7.21	[Gen. 18:19] Judicium facere est nos ipsos accusare et damnare; justitiam autem facere est fidere misericordiae Dei (To do judgment is to accuse and condemn ourselves; but to do righteousness is to trust in the mercy of God).
7.22	As it is written, "Blessed are those who keep judgment and do righteousness at all times."
7.23	[Ps. 106:3] The judgment is nothing else than a man's knowing and judging and condemning himself, and this is true humility and self-abasement.
7.24	The righteousness is nothing else than a man's knowing himself and praying to God for the mercy and help through which God raises him up again.
7.25	This is what David means when he says: "I have sinned; I will confess my transgressions to the Lord" [Ps. 32:5f.], and, "You forgave the iniquity of my sin; for this all Your saints shall pray to You."
7.26	Thirdly, there is also a confession when one takes another aside and tells him what troubles him, so that he may hear a word of comfort from him; and this confession is commanded by the pope.
7.27	It is this urging and forcing that I condemned when I wrote concerning confession, and I refuse to go to confession simply because the pope wishes it and has commanded it.
7.28	For I want him to keep his hands off confession and not make of it a compulsion or command, which he does not have the power to do.
7.29	Yet I will let no one take private confession away from me, and I would not give it up for all the treasures in the world, since I know what comfort and strength it has given me.
7.30	No one knows what it can do for him except one who has struggled much with the devil.
7.31	Indeed, the devil would have slain me long ago if confession had not sustained me.
7.32	For there are many doubts that a man cannot resolve by himself, and so he takes a brother aside and tells him his trouble.
7.33	What harm is there if he humbles himself a little before his neighbor, puts himself to shame, looks for a word of comfort from him, and takes it to himself and believes it, as if he heard it from God Himself, as we read in Matthew 18: "If two of you agree concerning anything that they ask, it shall be done for them"? [Matt. 18:19]
7.34	And we must have many absolutions, so that we may strengthen our timid consciences and despairing hearts against the devil and against God.
7.35	Therefore no one shall forbid confession, nor keep or drive anyone away from it.
7.36	And if anyone wrestles with his sins, is eager to be rid of them and looks for some assurance from the Scriptures, let him go and confess to another in secret, and receive what is said to him there as if it came directly from God's own lips.
7.37	Whoever has the strong and firm faith that his sins are forgiven may pass over this confession and confess to God alone.
7.38	But how many have such a strong faith?
7.39	Therefore, as I have said, I will not let this private confession be taken from me.
7.40	Yet I would force no one to it, but leave the matter to everyone's free will.
7.41	For our God is not so miserly that He has left us with only one comfort or strengthening for our conscience, or only one absolution; rather, we have many absolutions in the Gospel, and are richly showered with them.
7.42	For instance, we have this in the Gospel: "If you forgive others their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive you."
7.43	[Matt. 6:14] Another comfort we have in the Lord's Prayer: "Forgive us our trespasses" [Matt. 6:12], etc.
7.44	A third is our baptism, when I reason like this: See, my Lord, I am baptized in Your name so that I may be assured of Your grace and mercy.
7.45	After that we have private confession, when I go and receive a sure absolution as if God Himself spoke it, so that I may be assured that my sins are forgiven.
7.46	Finally I take the blessed sacrament for myself, when I eat His body and drink His blood as a sign that I am rid of my sins and that God has freed me from all my frailties; and in order to make me sure of this, He gives me His body to eat and His blood to drink, so that I shall not and cannot despair: I cannot doubt that I have a gracious God.
7.47	So we see that confession must not be despised, but that it is a true comfort.
7.48	And since we need many absolutions and comforts, because we must fight against the devil, death, hell and sin, we must not allow any of our weapons to be taken away, but must keep intact the whole armor and equipment that God has given us for use against our enemies.
7.49	For you do not yet know what work it is to fight with the devil and to overcome him.
7.50	I know it well; I have eaten salt with him once or twice.
7.51	I know him well, and he knows me well, too.
7.52	If only you knew him, you would not drive out confession in this way.
7.53	I commend you to God. Amen.
