0.1	Text: 1 John 3:13-18.
0.2	13 Do not marvel, brothers, if the world hates you.
0.3	14 We know that we have passed out of death into life, because we love the brothers.
0.4	Whoever does not love abides in death.
0.5	15 Anyone who hates his brother is a murderer, and you know that no murderer has eternal life remaining in him.
0.6	16 By this we know love, because he laid down his life for us; and we ought to lay down our lives for the brothers.
0.7	17 But whoever has the world’s goods and sees his brother in need, and shuts off his compassion from him, how does the love of God abide in him?
0.8	18 My little children, let us not love in word, nor with the tongue, but in deed and truth.
0.9	1. The Epistles and Gospels chosen for the Sundays of the Pentecost season have love as their general theme.
0.10	They deal not only with the love we owe to Christ and God, which is simply to be thankful for the unspeakable blessing of the forgiveness of sins and salvation through Christ’s blood and death, but also with the love we owe our neighbor—not a love given in return for favors, but one that unceasingly gives, forgives, and does every good even when it is not returned.
0.11	2. John here urges the Christian to practice the virtue of love.
0.12	Considering how plainly rare love is among men, this admonition is necessary.
0.13	He especially warns Christians not to wonder at the world’s hatred and its desire for their death.
0.14	Such was the hatred of Cain for his brother, of which the apostle has just spoken.
0.15	The world’s hatred, it must be admitted, repels love and powerfully hinders its exercise.
0.16	3. Is it not exceedingly strange that anyone can hate those who love him and from whom he has received nothing but kindness?
0.17	Such wickedness is almost inconceivable, we say.
0.18	What incentive does anyone have to serve the world when, in its ingratitude, it repays love with hatred?
0.19	But let us examine ourselves, who are baptized and have received the Gospel, and confess how we repay the supreme love of God in giving us his Son.
0.20	What a beautiful example of glad gratitude we display!
0.21	For the shame of it we ought to despise ourselves before God and his angels.
0.22	And what shall we say of those who will not endure the preaching of the glorious message of God’s grace and blessing, but condemn it as heresy? To them, those who seek to serve, benefit, and save the world by proclaiming the good news must be, as Paul says, “as the filth of the world, the scum of all things” (1 Corinthians 4:13).
0.23	Indeed, no criminal receives more wretched and shameful treatment and execution, of which the Pope and his followers are a case in point.
H:0.6	The World’s Hatred.
0.24	4. Although experience has proven this otherwise incredible fact, John still sees fit to give the admonition: “Do not marvel, brothers, if the world hates you.”
0.25	If we are not to wonder at this, is there anything in the world that should stir wonder?
0.26	I would truly think that hearing a single sermon on the grace of Christ would be enough to bring the world to receive the Gospel with intense joy and never to forget the divine mercy and blessing.
0.27	It would be no wonder if the earth suddenly opened and swallowed mankind because of its ingratitude to God, who has given his Son to become man in order to redeem us condemned mortals from sin and death and to restore us to life and salvation.
0.28	Is it not a horrible thing that anyone should shun and oppose such a Savior and his doctrine even more than he does the devil himself?
0.29	5. But what is God’s attitude toward such conduct?
0.30	Well does he say to the Jews through the prophet: “O my people, what have I done to you? And how have I wearied you? Bear witness against me.
0.31	For I brought you up out of the land of Egypt and redeemed you from the house of bondage; and I sent Moses, Aaron, and Miriam before you.
0.32	O my people, remember now what Balak king of Moab plotted, and what Balaam the son of Beor answered him; remember from Shittim to Gilgal, so that you may know the righteous acts of Jehovah.”
0.33	Micah 6:3-5. And well does Christ say to his ungrateful people: “O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, that kills the prophets and stones those who are sent to her! How often would I have gathered your children together, even as a hen gathers her chicks under her wings, and you would not!”
0.34	Matthew 23:37. As if he would say, “I surely did not come to bring about your death and condemnation by my message.
0.35	I am about to suffer death and God’s wrath for your sins.
0.36	I bring you God’s endless grace and blessing for time and eternity.
0.37	Then why this bitter hatred against me and my message?”
0.38	6. “Since the world hates even God for his kindness,” John argues, “do not marvel, my beloved, that you suffer the same fate.
0.39	What does it matter that I show my love by risking life and limb to uphold this doctrine of the Gospel and to help my neighbor?
0.40	Mine is but a poor, mean, crude, offensive love compared with the love that led Christ to die for me and to redeem me from eternal death.
0.41	If God’s supreme, unfathomable love fails to awaken the gratitude of the world, what wonder is it if the world hates you for all your kindness?
0.42	Why will you bring down your fist and stamp your foot in anger at such ingratitude?
0.43	You yourselves are of that race for whom the Son of God had to die.
0.44	And even if you were to die for the Gospel, your sacrifice would be as nothing compared to the fact that God, for the sake of the world, did not spare his own Son but allowed the world to put him to death.”
0.45	7. But where does the world’s hatred come from?
0.46	John tells us in verse twelve, when he mentions the incident of Cain, who, he says, “was of the evil one and killed his brother.
0.47	And why did he kill him?
0.48	Because his works were evil, and his brother’s righteous.”
0.49	An excellent reason for hating, indeed—the hater and murderer is evil and the benefactor good!
0.50	In civil and domestic affairs it is the evildoers and the disobedient who incur displeasure and receive punishment; and such a reward is just.
0.51	But whenever God has dealings with the world, it shows what a rotten fruit it is by hating, persecuting, and putting to death its very benefactors as evildoers and impostors.
0.52	This trait it inherits, John tells us, from its ancestor Cain, the great fratricide saint.
0.53	He is a true picture of the world of all times, and its spirit and fashion are ever patterned after him.
0.54	8. When mother Eve, the dear, godly woman, bore her first son, she declared in her joy and in her hope of God’s promise of the future seed that would bruise the serpent’s head: “I have gotten a man with the help of Jehovah” (Genesis 4:1); and she named him Cain, which means “obtained,” as if she would say, “I have obtained the true treasure.”
0.55	For she had never before seen a human being born; this was the first, precious fruit of mankind.
0.56	Over Cain she rejoiced, pronouncing herself blessed.
0.57	This son was brought up in the hope that he would be a savior of the future race, a comfort to his brothers and sisters and all their offspring.
0.58	Nor was he unaware of these proud hopes.
0.59	Proudly he lorded it over his brother, who by contrast had to bear the shameful name of Abel, meaning “nothing,” or “vanity,” as if voicing the thought of the parents’ hearts: “Alas! This one has no future.
0.60	Cain is the rightful heir to the blessing God has promised man; he is lord and master of his brothers.”
0.61	9. It is likely that the godly father and mother for many years drew their comfort from the hope they placed in their first-born son, as they looked forward with the most intense longing to redemption from their deplorable fall.
0.62	No doubt they trained both sons very carefully and instructed them concerning their own sin and fall and the promise God had given them, until the sons were fully grown and had entered into the priestly office.
0.63	Cain the first-born was particularly zealous in this respect, wanting to be first, inasmuch as he offered his first fruits of the earth, given by God and obtained by his own labor, as he had no doubt seen his father offer.
0.64	Abel, however, the lesser one, the poor shepherd, offered the firstlings of his sheep, given him by God and obtained without effort and toil of his own.
0.65	Now God, in a wonderful way, showed his preference concerning the gifts upon the altar.
0.66	Fire came down from heaven and consumed Abel’s offering, but Cain’s remained.
0.67	The fire was the sign of God’s favor.
0.68	The text says: “And Jehovah had respect for Abel and for his offering, but for Cain and for his offering he had no respect.”
0.69	Genesis 4:4-5.
0.70	10. Then Adam and Eve saw that the hope and comfort they had centered in their first-born son were a delusion.
0.71	They began to learn the wonderful judgments of God, who gave precedence to Abel, the male counterpart of Cinderella—which is all he was in his own eyes when he compared himself with his brother.
0.72	Now Cain, fully confident in his position and spoiled by his parents’ delusion that as the first-born he was God’s favorite, felt himself outraged.
0.73	His hypocrisy, masked until now, comes to the surface.
0.74	He burns with secret hatred against God, and with hatred and anger against his brother, which he takes no trouble whatever to hide.
0.75	His parents rebuke him, but accomplish nothing.
0.76	The flame of his resentment rises higher, and meeting his brother alone in the field, he strikes him to the ground.
0.77	Far from considering amendment of life or seeking grace from God, he has no mercy on the only brother he has on earth, who has done him no harm whatever.
0.78	He cannot forgive him and leave him in unenvied possession of the grace of God.
0.79	11. Such was the comfort and joy poor Adam and Eve lived to experience in their first children!
0.80	From this time on their earthly life was filled with gloom and sorrow, especially since they could not help but see the source of these in their own fall; and they would have pined away to death had not God comforted them with another son.
0.81	For when it became evident that the hope they had placed in Cain was a delusion, and that they had been deprived of the son who, beyond a doubt, possessed the grace of God, they, without another son, would not have known where to look for the comfort of the promised seed.
H:0.15	Cain the World, Abel the Church.
0.82	12. Note that in this man Cain the world is pictured in its true, characteristic colors; in him its true spirit stands reflected.
0.83	Certainly his equal has never existed.
0.84	In him are unquestionably prefigured the very flower, the very essence, of holiness on earth—the most pious servants of God.
0.85	On the other hand, that poor, wretched, lowly male counterpart of Cinderella, Abel, well represents the obscure little brotherhood, the Church of Christ.
0.86	She must yield to Cain the lord the distinction of being everything before God, of receiving every gift of God, of being entitled to all honor and every privilege.
0.87	He feels important in his imagined dignity, lets this spirit pervade his sacrifices and his worship, and thinks that God cannot help but favor and accept his offering rather than his brother’s.
0.88	Meanwhile, the pious Abel goes his way, meekly enduring his brother’s contempt.
0.89	He willingly yields the honor to Cain, considers himself far inferior, and sees no comfort for himself apart from the pure mercy and goodness of God.
0.90	He believes in God and hopes for the promised future seed.
0.91	In such faith he performs his sacrifice as a confession, a sign, of his gratitude.
0.92	13. This illustration is intended by God as comfort for his little band; for the incident is not written for Abel’s sake but for the sake of the humble children of God, whose condition is like Abel’s.
0.93	God has not forgotten them, though they are haughtily ignored by proud Cain, who regards them as nothing in his presence.
0.94	God graciously looks upon them and rejects proud Cain with his birthright and offering.
0.95	14. Innocent Abel becomes the object of anger and hatred when the Word of God takes hold of Cain, revealing God’s displeasure where Cain had imagined himself worthy, and God’s unwillingness to regard his offering and devotion as superior to his brother’s and more meritorious.
0.96	Cain begins to hate and persecute his brother bitterly.
0.97	He finds no rest until Abel is struck down and cut off from the earth.
0.98	Now you have the cause of the world’s hatred and anger against Christians; it is simply this, as John says of Cain: “Because his works were evil, and his brother’s righteous.”
0.99	15. What offense had godly Abel committed against his brother to be so hated?
0.100	He had even regarded that brother as the first-born, as far superior to himself, and had shown him every honor and loved him as a brother should.
0.101	He was easily satisfied, desiring only the grace of God.
0.102	He prayed for the future seed, that is, for the salvation and happiness of his parents, his brother, and the entire human race.
0.103	How could Cain be so unmerciful and inhuman in his frenzy as to murder his own flesh and blood?
0.104	The answer lies in the fact that the devil had filled Cain’s heart with pride and vanity over his birthright.
0.105	He considered himself a man of distinction, with every claim upon God’s favor, and sinless, while his brother was nothing whatever.
0.106	Cain’s heart is empty of true brotherly love; he has only contempt for Abel.
0.107	He cannot endure God’s evident favor toward his brother, and will not be moved by the command to humble himself and seek God’s grace.
0.108	Anger and envy possess him to such an extent that he cannot bear to let his brother live.
0.109	In violation of God’s commandment and his own conscience, he becomes a murderer, and then goes his way as if he had done right.
0.110	16. This is what John means when he says that Cain had no other cause for his crime than that his own works were evil and his brother’s righteous.
0.111	In the same way that obedient daughter of Saint Cain, the world, hates the Christians—and for no other reason than their love and goodness of heart.
0.112	Witness the examples of the holy patriarchs, the prophets, and, most of all, Christ himself.
0.113	17. What sin against the world did the beloved apostles commit?
0.114	They desired no one’s injury, but went about in extreme poverty and toil, teaching mankind how to be saved, through faith in Christ, from the devil’s kingdom and from eternal death.
0.115	This the world will not hear or tolerate; hence the hue and cry: “Kill, kill these people!
0.116	Away with them from the earth!
0.117	Show them no mercy!”
0.118	Why this hostility? Because the apostles sought to free the world from its idolatry and damnable doings.
0.119	Such good works the world could not tolerate.
0.120	What it desires is nothing but praise and commendation for its own evil doings, expecting from God the impossible endorsement: “Your deeds are good and well-pleasing to me.
0.121	You are pious children of mine.
0.122	Just keep on cheerfully killing all who believe and preach my Word.”
0.123	18. In the same way the world conducts itself today toward our Gospel.
0.124	We are hated and persecuted for no other reason than that we have, by God’s grace, proclaimed his Word, which rescued us from the blindness and idolatry in which we were sunk as deeply as the world, and because we desire to rescue others.
0.125	That is the unpardonable sin by which we have incurred the world’s irreconcilable anger and its inextinguishable hatred.
0.126	It cannot allow us to live.
0.127	We preach no other doctrine than faith in Christ, which our children pray and which they themselves confess in words.
0.128	We differ only in our claim that, since Christ was crucified for us and shed his blood to redeem us from sin and death, our salvation is not accomplished by our own works, or holiness, or devotion.
0.129	The fact that we do not regard their faithless worship as equal to Christ himself, but teach men to trust in the grace of God and not in their own worthiness, and to render him gratitude for his grace—this fact is intolerable to the world.
0.130	It would be well for our adversaries if they would receive such teaching, since it would make them more than ever what they profess to be: our superiors in wisdom, knowledge, and reputation—a claim we are willing to concede.
0.131	But Cain’s works are evil and Abel’s righteous.
0.132	The world simply cannot tolerate the Gospel, and no unity or harmony is ever to be hoped for.
0.133	The world will not forsake its idolatry nor receive the faith.
0.134	It would force us either to renounce the Word of God and praise its Cain-like worship, or to accept death at their hands.
0.135	19. Therefore John says, “Do not marvel, brothers, if the world hates you,” for it is compelled to act according to the nature it has inherited from its father Cain.
0.136	It would have all the merit and grant Abel none.
0.137	The world consists of the exalted, the wise, the learned, the mighty.
0.138	The Scriptures represent these as bound by necessity to hate and persecute the poor band of the Church of Christ because of the good works done by them.
0.139	Under no circumstances can they tolerate the idea of being taught by this despised and humble band the doctrine of salvation through the grace and mercy of God alone, not through man’s own merits.
0.140	They cannot endure the teaching that their offering—the Mass, regarded by the Papists as a work of supreme merit and holiness—avails nothing before God.
0.141	20. In the text the nature of the world is portrayed so that we may recognize it.
0.142	To understand the world well enough to know what may be expected from it is essential and valuable knowledge for the Christian.
0.143	Armed in this way, he will not be dismayed and become impatient under suffering, nor allow its malice and ingratitude to mislead him into hatred and a desire for revenge.
0.144	He will keep his faith and love, letting the world go its way if it refuses to hear his message.
0.145	The Christian should expect nothing better from the world than its bitter persecution in return for his good works and love.
0.146	Let him remember that the Church of Christ on earth is never to have an easier lot.
0.147	He is not to judge by show and appearance, thinking: “They are the great multitude, the wisest and cleverest people on earth; how is it possible that they should all be in error and under condemnation?”
0.148	21. It is necessarily true that discipline and peace are impossible without the most excellent, exalted, learned, clever people—royal, princely, noble in achievement and honor.
0.149	Cain is never plain and lowly.
0.150	He is always eminently clever, wise, holy, and in every way vastly superior to Abel.
0.151	In fact, he must in himself represent all desirable things, as his name indicates.
0.152	And the same characteristic is evident in his children, who are ingenious in inventing every kind of art. Deplorable is the fact that a man of Cain’s qualifications, born of godly parents and signally honored by God, should display such hatred and inhumanity toward poor Abel merely because of God’s Word and Abel’s faith.
0.153	22. Such knowledge is comforting to the godly little company of Christians, who are confident that they have God’s favor and know it to be the occasion of their persecution; they have no protection or help but are exposed to the same fate as Abel.
0.154	If they fare better, they may thank God for it.
0.155	But they are always to abide in love toward God, whose love they have received and felt, and likewise toward men, their enemies not excepted.
0.156	This was Abel’s way; could he have lived again, he would have kept his brotherly love for his murderer, forgiving him and even pleading for God’s forgiveness for him.
0.157	“We know that we have passed out of death into life, because we love the brothers.”
H:0.31	Love Moves Christians.
0.158	23. To abide in love should be the motive for us Christians.
0.159	John contrasts it with the motive of the world in hating us—its wickedness.
0.160	The world’s hatred of you, as John’s words imply, is not strange.
0.161	The contrast between you and the world is exceedingly great.
0.162	Through its own evil works, unbelief, pride, contempt for the Word and grace of God, and persecution of the godly, the world has by this time become the victim of Satan and eternal death.
0.163	It spurns all counsel and help aimed at its rescue.
0.164	Stiff-necked and hardened, evidently condemned by its own conscience, it has chosen to persist in its doom.
0.165	But we believers in Christ, God be praised, are different people!
0.166	We have come forth from death; we have passed through death and entered into life through the knowledge and faith of the Son of God, who has loved us and given himself for us.
0.167	24. Such grace and goodness of God, says the apostle, should move you not to be offended and overcome by the world’s ingratitude, hatred, and malice, and so to cease from holy endeavor and likewise become evil—a course that will result in the loss of your treasure.
0.168	It is yours not by your own effort but by grace alone; for at one time you, as well as they, languished in the kingdom and power of death, in evil works, far from faith and love.
0.169	Remember, therefore, to comfort yourselves with the thought of this great blessing, an advantage you enjoy above the others.
0.170	What if the world, abiding in death, does hate and persecute you who abide in life?
0.171	Whom can its hatred injure?
0.172	It cannot take from you the life it lacks while you possess it, nor deliver you to death, from which you have passed through Christ.
0.173	When it does its worst, it may perhaps falsely slander you, or deprive you of your property, or destroy your corrupt body—the final home of maggots and in any event doomed to decay—and so, through the death of the body, help you gain true life.
0.174	Thus the vengeance will be yours rather than its own.
0.175	Yours will be the joy of being transplanted from death into life, while the world must abide in death.
0.176	While those of the world think to deny you both the kingdom of heaven and the kingdom of earth, they themselves lose body and soul.
0.177	What more terrible retribution could their hatred and envy receive?
0.178	In order not to give the devil and the world that satisfaction, and much more for your own welfare, you must not allow your persecutions to rob you of your peace and salvation, nor lead you to lose your faith through impatience and desire for revenge.
0.179	Rather, pity their wretchedness and doom.
0.180	You lose nothing by their oppression; yours is the gain, theirs the loss.
0.181	For the slight grief inflicted on you in body and in time, it shall pay dearly both here and hereafter.
0.182	25. How do we know that we have passed from death into life?
0.183	John says: because we love the brothers.
0.184	Just what does he mean?
0.185	Is it not our doctrine that Christ first loved us, as John says elsewhere? That before we ever loved him he died and rose again for us?
0.186	When we fully believe in our Savior’s love, then our own hearts respond with perfect love to God and our neighbor.
0.187	Why, then, does John say, “We have passed out of death into life, because we love the brothers”?
0.188	26. The explanation is found in the words “We know.”
0.189	John says plainly, “From the fact that we love the brothers, we know that we have passed out of death into life.”
0.190	Love of the brothers is the test by which we may determine who are the true believers.
0.191	The apostle directed this epistle especially against false Christians; there are many who extol Christ, as unbelieving Cain did, and yet fail to bear the fruit of faith.
0.192	John is referring not to the means by which we pass from sin and death to life, but to the proof by which we may know the fact—not to the cause, but to the effect.
0.193	27. It is not enough to boast of having passed from death into life; there must be evidence of the fact.
0.194	Faith is not an idle and lifeless thing.
0.195	When there is faith in the heart, its power will be evident.
0.196	Where power is not in evidence, all boasting is false and vain.
0.197	When the human heart, in its confidence in divine mercy and love, is thrilled with spiritual comfort and also warmed into kindness, friendliness, humility, and patience toward the neighbor, envying and despising no one but cheerfully serving all and ministering to their need, even to the point of risking body and life—when this is the case, then the fruits of faith are evident.
0.198	Such fruits are proof that the believer has truly passed from death into life.
0.199	If he did not have true faith, but doubted God’s grace and love, his heart would not move him, out of love and gratitude to God, to show love for his neighbor.
0.200	Where a man has faith, and where he realizes God’s infinite mercy and goodness in raising him from death to life, love is kindled in his heart, and he is moved to do every kind of good, even to his enemies, as God has done to him.
0.201	28. Such is the right interpretation and understanding of John’s expression: “We know that we have passed out of death into life, because we love the brothers.”
0.202	It leaves the foundation intact—justification, or deliverance from death, through faith alone.
0.203	This is the first element of Christian doctrine.
0.204	Granting that faith does justify, the next question is whether the faith is real or feigned, being merely a deceptive show and an unsupported claim.
0.205	The clear teaching given by the apostles is that love, indeed, does not deliver from death, but that deliverance from death and the presence of life become a matter of sight and knowledge in that love has been produced.
0.206	With true faith we must have come to the point where we no longer, like Cain, in our pride and conceit, despise our neighbor; where we are not filled with envy, hatred, and bitterness; where we desire, and to the extent of our power promote, the interests of our neighbor and do him every good.
0.207	29. John draws to a close by showing the opposite side of the picture, in that he addresses earnest words that echo like peals of thunder to those who make the carnal boast of being Christians while lacking love.
0.208	He cites several facts as evidence that where love is lacking, faith and deliverance from death are necessarily absent as well.
0.209	In this way no opportunity is left for self-deception or for a frivolous excuse based on wordy boasting of one’s faith.
0.210	The reality of the inner life is known by the presence of love, which in turn attests the presence of faith in the heart.
0.211	I. “Whoever does not love abides in death.”
0.212	30. Here, in clear, decisive words, the conclusion is stated that no one may boast of life unless he has love.
0.213	If it is true that faith must be active, it is conversely true that the absence of fruit demonstrates that one continues in the old Cain-like manner of existence, sluggish and dead, bereft of comfort and of the experience of God’s grace and life.
0.214	Let no one presume to think he has passed into life as long as he is without love and the fruits of faith.
0.215	Let him become serious and, in alarm, make ready to become a true believer, lest he remain in eternal death and under greater condemnation than those who have never heard the Gospel.
0.216	II. “Anyone who hates his brother is a murderer, and you know that no murderer has eternal life remaining in him.”
0.217	31. Still clearer and stronger becomes the argument that lack of love means continuing in death.
0.218	The stern and frightful judgment is here expressed that the unloving person is no better than Cain the fratricide.
0.219	His heart is under the sway of deadly hatred and murderous malice against the brother who refuses to be subservient to his desires.
0.220	His kindling rage will prove its existence by corresponding works unless it is restrained by fear of disgrace and punishment.
0.221	He wishes his brother nothing good, but rejoices in his misfortune.
0.222	All this, however, is impossible for one who believes that he has been delivered from death.
0.223	One who knows from experience the wretchedness and misery of death, but has entered into life with its comfort and joy—blessings he seeks to keep—such a person will desire the same blessing for others; he cannot rejoice in another’s death.
0.224	Therefore the converse is true: “We know that no murderer has eternal life remaining in him.”
H:0.46	Hatred Natural to Human Reason.
0.225	32. Thus we see the nature of the human heart without faith and the knowledge of Christ; at bottom it is but the heart of a Cain, murderous toward its neighbor.
0.226	Nor can anything better be expected from one who is not a Christian.
0.227	The Scriptures repeatedly denounce such faithless hypocrites as bloodthirsty and deceitful.
0.228	“Jehovah abhors the bloodthirsty and deceitful man.”
0.229	Psalm 5:6. “For their feet run to evil, and they hurry to shed blood.”
0.230	Proverbs 1:16. See also verse 11.
0.231	All mankind are by nature the children of the murderer Cain.
0.232	They are, of course, no better than their father.
0.233	Though Cain was a most magnificent, intelligent, and wise man, being the first fruit born of those holy parents Adam and Eve, and in his superior endowment with natural virtues infinitely superior to all who came after him, he was nevertheless an unbeliever before God.
0.234	Hence he became the murderer of his brother.
0.235	III. “By this we know love, because he laid down his life for us; and we ought to lay down our lives for the brothers.
0.236	But whoever has the world’s goods and sees his brother in need, and shuts off his compassion from him, how does the love of God abide in him?”
0.237	33. These words portray true Christian love and hold up the sublime example, or pattern, of God’s love revealed in Christ.
0.238	Christ’s blood and death are God’s own blood and death.
0.239	Paul, in Acts 20:28, speaks of God having purchased the Church “with his own blood.”
0.240	The heart of man by faith receives and grasps this sacrifice.
0.241	Under its transforming influence he is inclined to do good to his neighbor as he himself has received good.
0.242	He even risks his life to that end, being conscious of his redemption from eternal death and knowing that physical death is powerless to affect his eternal life.
0.243	But the heart that fails to take hold of Christ’s sacrifice is without faith and insensible to God’s love and eternal life.
0.244	34. John uses an illustration plain enough for anyone to understand, and from which we may judge that the soul found wanting in small duties will be deficient in great ones.
0.245	According to the apostle, if someone possesses this world’s goods and sees his neighbor in want, being able to help without harm to himself, and yet closes his heart against that neighbor, not helping him with even the slightest work of love, how can the love of God dwell in him, since he values it so little that he will not spare his needy brother a penny?
0.246	How can he be expected, then, to render a greater service—even to lay down his life for his brother?
0.247	What right has such a soul to boast—how can he know—that Christ has laid down his life for him and delivered him from death?
0.248	35. How often such people are to be found!
0.249	Having this world’s goods and being able to help the needy, they close their hearts against the unfortunate, as the rich glutton did toward poor Lazarus.
0.250	Where shall we find in imperial courts, among kings, princes, and lords, any who extend a helping hand to the needy Church, or give her so much as a crust of bread toward the support of the poor, of the ministry, and of schools, or for any other of her needs?
0.251	How would they measure up in the greater duty of laying down their lives for the brothers, and especially for the Christian Church?
0.252	Note the terrible judgment that those who lack brotherly love are murderers in God’s sight and cannot have eternal life.
0.253	36. But the merely selfish may well escape our censure in comparison with those who not only close their purses to the poor but shamelessly and forcibly deprive and rob their needy neighbor of what is his by overreaching, fraud, oppression, and extortion; who take from the Church the property rightfully hers and especially set apart for her, snatching the bread from her mouth, so to speak.
0.254	Not only is the papist rabble today guilty of such sin, but many who would be known as evangelical practice the same fraud with regard to the parish estates and general property of the Church, and in addition tyrannically harass and torment the poor ministers.
0.255	But oh, how heavy and terrible is the judgment awaiting those who have denied Christ the Lord in his thirst even a cup of cold water!
0.256	IV. “My little children, let us not love in word, nor with the tongue, but in deed and truth.”
0.257	37. The world and the false Christians pretend great love in word; but in practice, when love should show itself in deeds, it is found to be insincere.
0.258	So John admonishes that where our love is not ardent enough to lead us to lay down our lives for our brothers, however much we may profess Christ, that love is surely only a vain show, a false pretense, by which we deceive ourselves and remain in unbelief and death, and in a more deplorable condition than those who are wholly ignorant of the Gospel.
0.259	Therefore let whoever would proceed safely and prove himself a Christian remember to prove himself such by his deeds and works.
0.260	Then men will know that he does not follow the devil like others, as a murderer and liar.
0.261	They will know, on the contrary, that he truly and with his heart clings to the Word of God, having passed from death to life.
