0.302	34. Learn, then, what condition the world is in—how far it is, not only from Christ’s immeasurable example, but from the commandment in this verse.
0.303	Where can anyone be found who understands the meaning of the little phrase “your neighbor,” even though there is, besides this commandment, the natural law of service written in the hearts of all men?
0.304	There is not one person who does not realize, and who is not forced to confess, the justice and truth of the natural law outlined in the command (Matthew 7:12), “All things therefore, whatever you would have men do to you, even so do you also to them.”
0.305	The light of this law shines in the reason that is inborn in all men.
0.306	If they would only heed it, what need would they have of books, teachers or laws?
0.307	They carry with them, in the depths of their hearts, a living book, able to teach them fully what to do and what to leave undone, what to accept and what to reject, and what decision to make.
0.308	Now, the command to love our neighbors as ourselves is equivalent to that other one, “Whatever you would have men do to you,” and so on.
0.309	Every individual desires to be loved and not hated; and he also feels and sees that he is obligated to show the same disposition toward others.
0.310	To carry out this obligation is to love another as himself.
0.311	But evil lust and sinful love obscure the light of the natural law and blind man, until he fails to perceive the guidebook in his heart and to follow the clear command of reason.
0.312	Hence he must be restrained and driven back by external laws and material books, with the sword and by force.
0.313	He must be reminded of his natural light, and his own heart must be revealed to him.
0.314	Yet admonition is of no avail; he does not see the light.
0.315	Evil lust and sinful love make him blind.
0.316	With the sword and with the laws of the state he must still be outwardly restrained from committing actual crimes.
0.317	35. The fourth thing the commandment sets before us is the standard by which we are to measure our love—an excellent model.
0.318	Those instructions and commandments are especially worthy which present examples.
0.319	This commandment holds up a truly living example—“yourself.”
0.320	It is a better model than any example the saints have given.
0.321	The saints are dead and their deeds are past, but this example is always alive.
0.322	Everyone must admit that he is conscious of his own love for himself; of his ardent concern for his earthly life; of the care with which he nourishes his body with food, clothing and all good things; of how he flees from death and avoids evil.
0.323	This is self-love, something we are aware of in ourselves.
0.324	What, then, does the commandment teach?
0.325	To do to another as you do to yourself; to value his body and his life as highly as your own body and life.
0.326	Now, how could God have pointed you to an example dearer, more pleasing and more to the purpose than this one—the deep instinct of your nature?
0.327	Indeed, the depth of your character is measured by the writing of this command in your heart.
0.328	36. How will it go with you before God if you do not love your neighbor?
0.329	Since you feel this commandment written within your heart, your conscience will condemn you.
0.330	Your whole conduct will be an example that witnesses against you, testifying that you failed to do to others as the natural instinct of your being—more forcefully than all the examples of the saints—has taught you to do.
0.331	But how will it go with the clergy in particular—the churchmen with their singing and praying, their cowls and shaven crowns, and all their trickery?
0.332	I say nothing about the fact that they have never kept the commandment.
0.333	I ask, however: when has their monastic fanaticism allowed them time and opportunity to perceive this law in their hearts even once, to become aware of the example set for them in their own human instinct, or even to read the precept in books or hear it preached?
0.334	Poor, miserable people! Do you presume to think that God will make void this commandment of love, so deeply and clearly impressed upon the heart, so beautifully and unmistakably illustrated in your own natures, and in the many written and spoken words as well—do you think God will do this on account of your cowls and shaven crowns, and have regard for what you have been devising and performing?
0.335	37. Alas, how shamelessly the world has ignored this beautiful and impressive commandment, in which the individual, the task, the model and the sphere of labor are so skillfully presented!
0.336	And, on the other hand, how shamefully it busies itself with the very reverse of what this commandment teaches!
0.337	Its whole practice and tendency seem to be to place our responsibility upon others; monks and priests must be righteous for us and pray in our place, so that we ourselves may be excused.
0.338	For the noblest virtue, love, we substitute self-devised works; in place of our neighbors we put wood and stone, clothing and food, even dead souls—the saints of heaven.
0.339	These we serve; with these we are occupied; they are the sphere in which we exercise ourselves.
0.340	Instead of the noblest example—“as yourself”—we look to the legends and the works of saints.
0.341	We presume to imitate such outward examples, neglecting the duty which our own nature and life present and which the command of God outlines, even though that duty offers more than we could ever fulfill.
0.342	Even if we could accomplish everything it offers, we would still not be equal to Christ.
H:0.49	Love Works Only Good to Its Neighbor.
0.343	“Love works no ill to its neighbor; love, therefore, is the fulfillment of the law.”
0.344	38. The Ten Commandments forbid doing evil to our neighbor—“You shall not kill, You shall not commit adultery,” and so on.
0.345	The apostle, using similar wording, says that love keeps all these commands, injuring no one.
0.346	Not only that; it brings about good for all.
0.347	It is practically doing evil to allow our neighbor to remain in danger when we can relieve him, even though we may have had no part in putting him where he is.
0.348	If he is hungry and we do not feed him when it is in our power to do so, we practically let him die of hunger.
0.349	We should take this view of any perilous condition, any adverse circumstance, in which our neighbors find themselves.
0.350	We have now heard how love is the fulfillment of the Law.
