0.1	The next thing is perhaps the most difficult of all to deal with—Forgiveness.
0.2	I believe this is keeping more people from having power with God than anything else—they are not willing to cultivate the spirit of forgiveness.
0.3	If we allow the root of bitterness to spring up in our hearts against someone, our prayer will not be answered.
0.4	It may not be an easy thing to live in sweet fellowship with all those with whom we come in contact; but that is what the grace of God is given to us for.
0.5	The disciples’ prayer is a test of sonship; if we can pray all of it from the heart, we have good reason to think that we have been born of God.
0.6	No man can call God Father except by the Spirit.
0.7	Though this prayer has been such a blessing to the world, I believe it has been a great snare; many stumble over it into perdition.
0.8	They do not weigh its meaning, nor take its facts right into their hearts.
0.9	I have no sympathy with the idea of universal sonship—that all men are the sons of God.
0.10	The Bible teaches very plainly that we are adopted into the family of God.
0.11	If all were sons, God would not need to adopt any.
0.12	We are all God’s by creation; but when people teach that any man can say, “Our Father who is in heaven,” whether he is born of God or not, I think that is contrary to Scripture.
0.13	“As many as are led by the Spirit of God, these are the sons of God.”
0.14	Sonship in the family is the privilege of the believer.
0.15	“In this the children of God are manifest, and the children of the devil,” says the Apostle.
0.16	If we are doing the will of God, that is a very good sign that we are born of God.
0.17	If we have no desire to do that will, how can we call God “Our Father”?
0.18	Another thing: we cannot really pray for God’s kingdom to come until we are in it.
0.19	If we pray for the coming of God’s kingdom while we are rebelling against Him, we are only seeking our own condemnation.
0.20	No unrenewed man really wants God’s will to be done on the earth.
0.21	You might write over the door of every unsaved man’s house, and over his place of business, “God’s will is not done here.”
0.22	If the nations were really to offer up this prayer, all their armies could be discharged.
0.23	They tell us there are some twelve million men in the standing armies of Europe alone.
0.24	But men do not want God’s will done on earth as it is in heaven; that is the trouble.
0.25	Now let us come to the part I want to dwell on: “Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive those who trespass against us.”
0.26	This is the only part of the prayer that Christ explained.
0.27	“For if you forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive you; but if you do not forgive men their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your trespasses.”
0.28	Notice that when you go into the door of God’s kingdom, you go in through the door of forgiveness.
0.29	I never knew of a man getting a blessing in his own soul if he was not willing to forgive others.
0.30	If we are unwilling to forgive others, God cannot forgive us.
0.31	I do not know how language could be plainer than it is in these words of our Lord.
0.32	I firmly believe a great many prayers are not answered because we are not willing to forgive someone.
0.33	Let your mind go back over the past, and through the circle of your acquaintances; are there any against whom you are cherishing hard feelings?
0.34	Is there any root of bitterness springing up against someone who has perhaps injured you?
0.35	It may be that for months or years you have been nursing this unforgiving spirit; how can you ask God to forgive you?
0.36	If I am not willing to forgive those who may have committed some single offense against me, what a mean, contemptible thing it would be for me to ask God to forgive the ten thousand sins of which I have been guilty!
0.37	But Christ goes still further.
0.38	He says: “If you bring your gift to the altar, and there remember that your brother has something against you, leave your gift there before the altar, and go your way; first be reconciled to your brother, and then come and offer your gift.”
0.39	It may be that you are saying, “I do not know that I have anything against anyone.”
0.40	Does anyone have anything against you?
0.41	Is there someone who thinks you have done them wrong?
0.42	Perhaps you have not; but it may be they think you have.
0.43	I will tell you what I would do before I go to sleep tonight: I would go and see them, and have the question settled.
0.44	You will find that you will be greatly blessed in the very act.
0.45	Suppose you are in the right and they are in the wrong; you may win your brother or sister.
0.46	May God root this unforgiving spirit out of all our hearts.
0.47	A gentleman came to me some time ago and wanted me to talk to his wife about her soul.
0.48	That woman seemed as anxious as any person I ever met, and I thought it would not take long to lead her into the light; but it seemed that the longer I talked with her, the more her darkness increased.
0.49	I went to see her again the next day, and found her in still greater darkness of soul.
0.50	I thought there must be something in the way that I had not discovered, and I asked her to repeat this disciples’ prayer with me.
0.51	I thought that if she could say this prayer from the heart, the Lord would meet her in peace.
0.52	I began to repeat it sentence after sentence, and she repeated it after me until I came to this petition: “Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive those who trespass against us.”
0.53	There she stopped. I repeated it a second time and waited for her to say it after me; she said she could not do it.
0.54	“What is the trouble?”
0.55	She replied, “There is one woman I will never forgive.”
0.56	“Oh,” I said, “I have found your difficulty; there is no use in my going on to pray, for your prayers will not go higher than my head.
0.57	God says He will not forgive you unless you forgive others.
0.58	If you do not forgive this woman, God will never forgive you.
0.59	That is the decree of heaven.”
0.60	She said, “Do you mean to say that I cannot be forgiven until I have forgiven her?”
0.61	“No, I do not say it; the Lord says it, and that is far better authority.”
0.62	She said, “Then I will never be forgiven.”
0.63	I left the house without having made any impression on her.
0.64	A few years later I heard that this woman was in an asylum for the insane.
0.65	I believe this spirit of unforgiveness drove her mad.
0.66	If there is someone who has something against you, go at once and be reconciled.
0.67	If you have something against anyone, write them a letter telling them that you forgive them, and so get this thing off your conscience.
0.68	I remember being in the inquiry room some years ago; I was in one corner of the room, talking to a young lady.
0.69	There seemed to be something in the way, but I could not find out what it was.
0.70	At last I said, “Is there not someone you do not forgive?”
0.71	She looked up at me and said, “What made you ask that?
0.72	Has anyone told you about me?”
0.73	“No,” I said, “but I thought perhaps that might be the case, since you have not received forgiveness yourself.”
0.74	“Well,” she said, pointing to another corner of the room, where a young lady was sitting, “I have had trouble with that young lady; we have not spoken to each other for a long time.”
0.75	“Oh,” I said, “it is all plain to me now; you cannot be forgiven until you are willing to forgive her.”
0.76	It was a great struggle.
0.77	But then, you know, the greater the cross, the greater the blessing.
0.78	It is human to err, but it is Christlike to forgive and be forgiven.
0.79	At last this young lady said, “I will go and forgive her.”
0.80	Strange to say, the same conflict was going on in the mind of the lady in the other part of the room.
0.81	They both came to their right mind at about the same time.
0.82	They met each other in the middle of the floor.
0.83	The one tried to say that she forgave the other, but they could not finish; so they rushed into each other’s arms.
0.84	Then the four of us—the two seekers and the two workers—got down on our knees together, and we had a grand meeting.
0.85	These two went away rejoicing.
0.86	Dear friend, is this the reason why your prayers are not answered?
0.87	Is there some friend, some member of your family, someone in the church, whom you have not forgiven?
0.88	We sometimes hear of members of the same church who have not spoken to each other for years.
0.89	How can we expect God to forgive when this is the case?
0.90	I remember one town that Mr. Sankey and I visited.
0.91	For a week it seemed as if we were beating the air; there was no power in the meetings.
0.92	At last I said one day that perhaps someone was cultivating this unforgiving spirit.
0.93	The chairman of our committee, who was sitting next to me, got up and left the meeting in full view of the audience.
0.94	The arrow had hit the mark and gone home to the heart of the chairman of the committee.
0.95	He had had trouble with someone for about six months.
0.96	He at once hunted up this man and asked him to forgive him.
0.97	He came to me with tears in his eyes and said, “I thank God you ever came here.”
0.98	That night the inquiry room was thronged.
0.99	The chairman became one of the best workers I have ever known, and he has been active in Christian service ever since.
0.100	Several years ago the Church of England sent a devoted missionary to New Zealand.
0.101	After a few years of toil and success, he was holding a communion service one Sabbath in a district where the converts had not long before been savages.
0.102	As the missionary was conducting the service, he observed one of the men, just as he was about to kneel at the rail, suddenly start to his feet and hastily go to the opposite end of the church.
0.103	By and by he returned and calmly took his place.
0.104	After the service the clergyman took him aside and asked the reason for his strange behavior.
0.105	He replied: “As I was about to kneel, I recognized in the man next to me the chief of a neighboring tribe, who had murdered my father and drunk his blood; and I had sworn by all the gods that I would slay that man at the first opportunity.
0.106	At first the impulse to have my revenge almost overpowered me, and I rushed away, as you saw me, to escape its power.
0.107	As I stood at the other end of the room and considered the purpose of our meeting, I thought of Him who prayed for His own murderers: ‘Father, forgive them, for they do not know what they do.’
0.108	And I felt that I could forgive the murderer of my father, and I came and knelt down at his side.”
0.109	As someone has said: “There is an ugly kind of forgiveness in the world—a kind of hedgehog forgiveness, shot out like quills.
0.110	Men take one who has offended, and set him down before the blowpipe of their indignation, and scorch him, and burn his fault into him; and when they have kneaded him sufficiently with their fists, then they forgive him.”
0.111	The father of Frederick the Great, on his deathbed, was warned by M. Roloff, his spiritual adviser, that he was bound to forgive his enemies.
0.112	He was quite troubled, and after a moment’s pause said to the Queen: “You, Feekin, may write to your brother (the King of England) after I am dead, and tell him that I forgave him and died at peace with him.”
0.113	“It would be better,” M. Roloff mildly suggested, “for Your Majesty to write at once.”
0.114	“No,” was the stern reply.
0.115	“Write after I am dead.
0.116	That will be safer.”
0.117	Another story tells of a man who, supposing he was about to die, expressed his forgiveness to one who had injured him, but added: “Now mind you, if I get well, the old grudge still holds.”
0.118	My friends, that is not forgiveness at all.
0.119	I believe true forgiveness includes forgetting the offense—putting it entirely away out of our hearts and memories.
0.120	As Matthew Henry says: “We do not forgive our offending brother rightly or acceptably if we do not forgive him from the heart, for it is that God looks at.
0.121	No malice must be harbored there, nor ill will toward anyone; no plans of revenge must be hatched there, nor desires for it, as there are in many who outwardly appear peaceful and reconciled.
0.122	We must from the heart desire and seek the welfare of those who have offended us.”
0.123	If God’s forgiveness were like that often shown by us, it would not be worth much.
0.124	Suppose God said, “I will forgive you, but I will never forget it; all through eternity I will keep reminding you of it”; we should not feel that to be forgiveness at all.
0.125	Notice what God says: “I will remember their sin no more.”
0.126	In a passage in Ezekiel it is said that not one of our sins shall be mentioned; is that not like God?
0.127	I do like to preach this forgiveness—the sweet truth that sin is blotted out for time and eternity, and shall never once be mentioned against us.
0.128	In another Scripture we read: “Their sins and iniquities I will remember no more.”
0.129	Then when you turn to the eleventh chapter of Hebrews and read God’s roll of honor, you find that not one of the sins of any of those men of faith is mentioned.
0.130	Abraham is spoken of as the man of faith; but it is not told how he denied his wife down in Egypt; all that had been forgiven.
0.131	Moses was kept out of the Promised Land because he lost patience; but this is not mentioned in the New Testament, though his name appears in the Apostle’s roll of honor.
0.132	Samson, too, is named, but his sins are not brought up again.
0.133	Why, we even read of “righteous Lot”; he did not look much like a righteous man in the Old Testament story, but he has been forgiven, and God has made him “righteous.”
0.134	If we are once forgiven by God, our sins will be remembered against us no more.
0.135	This is God’s eternal decree.
0.136	Brooks says of God’s pardon granted to His people: “When God pardons sin, He takes it clean away, so that if it should be sought for, it still could not be found; as the prophet Jeremiah says: ‘In those days and at that time, says the Lord, the iniquity of Israel shall be sought for, and there shall be none; and the sins of Judah, and they shall not be found; for I will pardon those whom I reserve.’
0.137	As David, when he saw in Mephibosheth the features of his friend Jonathan, took no notice of his lameness or any other defect or deformity, so God, beholding in His people the glorious image of His Son, winks at all their faults and deformities; which made Luther say, ‘Do with me what You will, since You have pardoned my sin.’
0.138	And what is it to pardon sin, but not to mention sin?”
0.139	We read in the Gospel of Matthew: “Moreover, if your brother trespasses against you, go and tell him his fault between you and him alone; if he hears you, you have gained your brother.”
0.140	Then a little further on we read that Peter comes to Christ and says, “How often shall my brother sin against me, and I forgive him?
0.141	Up to seven times?” Jesus replied, “I do not say to you, up to seven times, but up to seventy times seven.”
0.142	Peter did not seem to think that he was in danger of falling into sin; his question was, How often should I forgive my brother?
0.143	But very soon we hear that Peter has fallen.
0.144	I can imagine that when he did fall, the sweet thought came to him of what the Master had said about forgiving up to seventy times seven.
0.145	The voice of sin may be loud, but the voice of forgiveness is louder.
0.146	Let us enter into David’s experience, when he said: “Blessed is he whose transgression is forgiven, whose sin is covered.
0.147	Blessed is the man to whom the Lord does not impute iniquity, and in whose spirit there is no deceit.
0.148	When I kept silent, my bones grew old through my roaring all the day long.
0.149	For day and night Your hand was heavy upon me; my moisture is turned into the drought of summer.
0.150	I acknowledged my sin to You, and my iniquity I have not hidden.
0.151	I said, I will confess my transgressions to the Lord; and You forgave the iniquity of my sin.”
0.152	David could look below, above, behind, and before—to the past, present, and future—and know that all was well.
0.153	Let us make up our minds that we will not rest until this question of sin is settled forever, so that we can look up and claim God as our forgiving Father.
0.154	Let us be willing to forgive others, that we may be able to claim forgiveness from God, remembering the words of the Lord Jesus, how He said: “If you forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive you; but if you do not forgive men their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your trespasses.”
