0.1	“Behold, what manner of love the Father has bestowed upon us, that we should be called the sons of God: therefore the world does not know us, because it did not know Him.
0.2	Beloved, now we are the sons of God, and it does not yet appear what we shall be: but we know that, when He appears, we shall be like Him; for we shall see Him as He is.
0.3	And every man who has this hope in him purifies himself, even as He is pure.”
0.4	1 John 3:1–3
0.5	Because we need again and again to be reminded of the truth contained in these verses, God directs our special attention to this little portion by placing the word “Behold” in front of it!
0.6	It is as if He meant to say, “My dear children, the whole of the revealed will of God, the whole of the Holy Scriptures, which I put into your hands, is important to be considered, to be pondered, and to be read from time to time; but there are certain portions which, because of your spiritual infirmity and because of the difficulties in which you find yourselves spiritually while passing through this vale of tears, you especially need to read from time to time, you especially need to ponder from time to time; and therefore, because of your weakness, I direct your attention to such portions.”
0.7	Now, then, let us ponder, particularly ponder, the truth contained in this little statement made in these three verses.
0.8	“Behold!” “Look at it carefully, ponder it, pray over it again and again, lay it to heart still more and more than you have been doing up to now,” our Father would say to us!
0.9	“What manner of love the Father has bestowed on us, that we should be called the sons of God.”
0.10	That is the special point to which our attention is directed in the first place.
0.11	If God had forgiven us, so that punishment had not come upon us on account of our countless transgressions, and had done no more, this would have been wondrous grace; but He has done far, far, FAR more than this.
0.12	And therefore it says, “What manner of love.”
0.13	The greatness of it is this: not only has the Lord passed over our countless transgressions and forgiven every one of them, so that we shall not be dealt with according to the thousandth part of the sins of which we have been guilty – no, not concerning even one single sin, in action, in word, or in thought – but He makes us His own children and takes us into the Heavenly Family.
0.14	We, who are by nature rebels against Him, who despise His love, who do not care in the least about Him, and who show this complete dislike and disregard of God day by day by going our own way and doing the things that are hateful to Him – we are not only forgiven, and not only shall we not be punished for one single sin out of the many tens of thousands of sins of which we have been guilty, in action, or word, or thought, or feeling, or desire, or inclination, but we are made His own children, taken into His family, and that not merely in name, but in reality.
0.15	By the power of the Holy Spirit, through belief in the gospel, He regenerates us, makes us a new creation in Christ, makes us His very own children.
0.16	He does not merely call us so, but makes us His very own children.
0.17	He gives us spiritual life, heavenly life, and so makes us His very own children.
0.18	That is the wondrous grace which we should ponder.
0.19	That is what God calls us to ponder: not to pass it by lightly, not to think little of it, but to think very, very, very much of it, and never to let it pass out of our minds until at last we get home to glory!
0.20	This is the “manner of love,” the kind of love which “the Father has bestowed upon us.”
0.21	O Lord! Help us to ponder it a thousand times more than we have pondered it so far.
0.22	O Lord! Help us, by the power of Your Holy Spirit, to lay it to heart a thousand times more than we have laid it to heart so far; and grant that, through considering it, through praying over it, through laying it to heart far more abundantly than we have done until now, our hearts may be filled with love to You and with gratitude in a way that has not yet been the case!
0.23	O grant that it may be so, for Jesus Christ’s sake, we implore You.
0.24	“Behold, what manner of love the Father has bestowed upon us.”
0.25	Now, here is a good practical point.
0.26	“Bestowed upon us”; and to be able to say, “Bestowed upon me.”
0.27	That is what I, by the grace of God, am able to say.
0.28	That is what, by the grace of God, many scores of those present here are able to say.
0.29	But is everyone able to say it?
0.30	This is what I desire, this is what I pray that God would grant to everyone present here: that each of them shall be able to say, “Has bestowed on me.”
0.31	Oh, how happy this would make us, how heavenly-minded it would make us, how dead to the world it would make us!
0.32	And in some small degree it would make us more Christlike than we have been so far!
0.33	“Bestowed upon us.” That we sinners, such as we are, rebellious sinners as we are by nature, should be called the sons of God – more literally and correctly the children of God, for it is a blessing bestowed not merely upon male believers, but upon female believers, upon all who love the Lord Jesus and trust in Him for the salvation of their souls!
0.34	Therefore, that we should be called the children of God.
0.35	Oh, how precious! Unspeakably blessed is this, that we belong to the Heavenly Family!
0.36	By nature every one of us is just as the Jews were, to whom the Lord Jesus said on one occasion, “Your father is the devil” – “for you do his works; you act according to his mind, you act according to your father the devil.”
0.37	Now, this was not only true of the Israelites, to whom the Lord was speaking; it is also true of us, while we are not believers in the Lord Jesus.
0.38	We may call ourselves children of God, and we may call God our Father, but it is not true as long as we are not trusting in the Lord Jesus Christ for the salvation of our souls; the moment, however, that we believe in the Lord Jesus Christ – however long and however much we have lived in sin, however varied our sins, however great they may have been – all is forgiven; we are regenerated through receiving the gospel, born again, and then we are truly the children of God and belong to the Heavenly Family!
0.39	Then the Holy Spirit, through the apostle, adds, “Therefore the world does not know us, because it did not know Him.”
0.40	The children are not known because the Father is not known.
0.41	As long as people are not believers in the Lord Jesus Christ, they do not know the children of God as children of God!
0.42	They may know their name, they may know their occupation, they may know where they live, how they are dressed, and similar things which belong to the outward man and to this present time; but insofar as they are the children of God, those who are themselves unconverted do not know the believers in Jesus, and the reason is given to us here: “Because they do not know the Father” of the children.
0.43	They do not know God Almighty and the Lord Jesus Christ, and therefore they do not really and truly know the children of God as children of God.
0.44	The divine life cannot be discerned by the ungodly.
0.45	“Beloved, now we are the sons of God”; “Beloved, now we are the children of God” – for the same change is to be made here.
0.46	“Now!” This little word “now” is especially to be considered, to be laid hold of, and to be greatly pondered.
0.47	It means this: while still in the body – that is, while still in weakness, beset with many infirmities in many respects, and very ignorant, in that state of weakness and helplessness in which all true believers in the Lord Jesus Christ are to a greater or lesser degree – we are nevertheless children of God; for though we are not all like John, who wrote this epistle, or like Paul, or like Peter, yet, notwithstanding all our many infirmities and weaknesses and failures and shortcomings, as surely as we put our trust in the Lord Jesus Christ for the salvation of our souls, we are already, even while still in the body, really and truly the children of God!
0.48	This is a precious truth!
0.49	And we must lay hold of this little word “now” by faith, ponder it in our hearts again and again and again, and not let it go, nor suppose that we only become children of God when we die, or when the Lord Jesus Christ comes again.
0.50	No, we are already the children of God now.
0.51	This, as you all see at once, even the youngest of believers, implies that we have a Father in heaven, and that this our Father in heaven is none other than God Almighty – the God who can do everything, to whom nothing is impossible.
0.52	See how precious this is.
0.53	Our Father can do everything!
0.54	Therefore, He is infinitely wise; He is infinitely rich; He is infinitely mighty; and His heart is full of infinite love to the weakest and feeblest of the children of God.
0.55	Therefore, suppose I have pain in my body: let me go to my Heavenly Father and speak to Him about it in all childlike simplicity, and ask Him, if it is for His glory and for my real good and profit and blessing, that He would graciously be pleased either to remove the pain entirely or else to lessen it, or, while it is necessary that it should last, that He would be pleased to sustain me under it so that I may not be overcome by it, and especially that I may not fret and complain and murmur, but take it out of His loving hand as a blessing bestowed upon me, which in the end must prove good for me.
0.56	If we are in a family trial, we should say to ourselves, “This family trial is not only very heavy for me to bear, but it will prove too much if I have to bear it myself; I will commit the matter into the hands of my Heavenly Father and ask Him to be graciously pleased to remove the trial, if it is for His honor and glory and for my real blessing.”
0.57	He is able to do it, for He can do everything, and He has proved the depth of His love by not sparing His only begotten Son, but delivering Him up for us all.
0.58	Then again, people in positions of employment, or in businesses, or carrying on a profession, find difficulties connected with their trade, connected with their business, connected with their profession.
0.59	Now, the great point is not to carry the burden ourselves, but to cast it upon the Lord.
0.60	He is willing to sustain us, willing to help us; and in doing so we pass peacefully and quietly through life; we are not inclined to fret, to complain, to murmur, and to be dissatisfied with God’s dealings with us, if we cast the burden upon Him and do not attempt to carry it ourselves!
0.61	And this is just what we should do; and this is just one of the many reasons why the Holy Spirit states here, “Now we are the children of God” – that is, while still in the body, while still surrounded by trial and difficulty, while still finding that conflict is more or less our lot.
0.62	Oh, this precious little word, “NOW.”
0.63	It contains a vast amount of deeply instructive, instructing truth.
0.64	Again, we now have the spiritual conflict; our natural evil tendencies are still in us, though we are regenerated.
0.65	The old nature is not removed; the old nature remains in us, just as it was before our faith in the Lord Jesus Christ.
0.66	It is true that we are regenerated, we are born again; it is true that we have spiritual life – but it is also true that the old nature is not dead; the old nature is still in us, and can only be kept down by prayer and meditation and pondering the Word of God, and by exercising faith continually.
0.67	And therefore, when trials come in connection with the old, evil, corrupt nature in us, we should spread the matter in all simplicity before God and say, “My Heavenly Father, I have no strength in myself; but there is almighty power with You, and Your heart is full of love to me, and You have proved Your wondrous love to me by bringing me to Jesus, and by giving Jesus for me, a poor, miserable, guilty sinner.
0.68	Now help me in this spiritual conflict of mine.
0.69	Oh, let me not be overpowered by this cunning of the devil, and on account of my spiritual weakness.
0.70	Oh, help me! Help me!
0.71	Help me!” What shall we find?
0.72	The Lord is willing to help us!
0.73	The Lord is willing to help us!!
0.74	I assure my young brothers and sisters in Christ of how He has helped me, now for seventy-one years and five months, times without number, and particularly at the beginning of the divine life in me.
0.75	Because of the evil habits I had formed as an unconverted young man, and the ungodly way in which I had been living up to the end of the twentieth year of my life, I found it extremely difficult, though truly a child of God and though hating sin and loving holiness, to overcome those evil tendencies which I had acquired.
0.76	It looked like this: “Oh, it will never be any different, and my prayer will never be answered.”
0.77	But by the grace of God I rolled my burden on Him and came to Him again and again.
0.78	So, little by little, it came about – and it was only little by little; it took some time – that these natural tendencies were overcome, and God helped me.
0.79	I mention this particularly for the comfort and encouragement of young, recently converted believers in Christ, that they should not despair, but expect help from God, for He is able and willing to help them.
0.80	Never, never, as long as we go to the Lord in our weakness and helplessness, shall we be overpowered; and just because we are the children of God now, the glory will therefore be our portion at last.
0.81	It is not that we become children of God when this life is over; no, while we are still in the body, while we are still here on earth, while we are still in great weakness and helplessness and great ignorance concerning many things, and while the devil has power over us, while he is not yet cast into the bottomless pit – even now we are the children of God, and shall have help from God just as we need it.
0.82	Oh, how comforting this word is.
0.83	Therefore let us continually ponder it, and not lose sight of it.
0.84	“Beloved, now” – in weakness; “now,” while the devil still has so much power; “now,” while in such great ignorance – “we are the children of God, and it does not yet appear what we shall be.”
0.85	Though we are now children of God, and as such have many privileges and may go continually to God for counsel, for advice, for help, for strength, for deliverance out of difficulties, for being supplied temporally and spiritually according to our need, yet with all this, great as the privileges are which we already enjoy, they are but little in comparison with what we shall have hereafter.
0.86	Therefore we must also ponder this: that while, on the one hand, this word “now” should never be lost sight of, yet on the other hand we should not forget what is written here, “It does not yet appear what we shall be.”
0.87	And what is it that will appear hereafter?
0.88	What is it that I, poor, worthless worm that I am, shall have hereafter?
0.89	What is it that I, an ignorant one, shall know hereafter?
0.90	What is it that shall be found hereafter in me, a weak one, and an erring one, and a falling one?
0.91	Oh, this is a deeply important thought.
0.92	“It does not yet appear what we shall be” – it is not yet made manifest what we shall be.
0.93	Oh, how will it be with the body?
0.94	How will it be with the soul?
0.95	How will it be with our knowledge?
0.96	How will it be with our spiritual power?
0.97	How will it be with our service for the Lord?
0.98	Oh, how will it be in every way?
0.99	An eternal blessing shall be granted to us, from then on, forever!
0.100	“It does not yet appear what we shall be, but we know that, when He appears, we shall be like Him, for we shall see Him as He is.”
0.101	When Jesus appears we shall be like Him – like Him as to His glorified body, which He has had since His resurrection.
0.102	Now, for any of us who are often in pain in the body, or who find their weakness and infirmity constantly reminding them that they are not yet at home and have not yet obtained the glorified body – oh, how precious is the thought that a day is coming when not the least particle of uneasiness will be found, nor of pain and suffering and weakness and helplessness, for we shall have a glorified body, exactly such a body as the Lord Jesus Christ has had since His own resurrection.
0.103	This is a precious, bright, glorious prospect!
0.104	And in this body, because it will be such a body as the Lord Jesus Christ has had since His resurrection, we shall know nothing of weariness.
0.105	At present we may be able to work joyfully and gladly eight, ten, or twelve hours, sometimes fourteen, or even sixteen hours a day, but at last weakness comes, because we are still in the body of humiliation and not in the glorified body.
0.106	But then, hereafter, there will be twenty-four hours’ work, and the next day the same, and the next day the same; and so the ability to work seven times twenty-four hours every week, and thirty days every month able to work the whole day.
0.107	And so it will go on, month after month, year after year, one hundred years after another, one thousand years after another, one million years after another, and so throughout eternity.
0.108	Work, work, work! Constant work to the glory of God in this our glorified body!
0.109	Oh, what bright, blessed, glorious prospects these are, if the heart enters into them.
0.110	Oh, how we are gladdened by the thought of working for God throughout eternity without the least particle of weakness, weariness, and suffering!
0.111	But this is only one part of it.
0.112	The other part is this.
0.113	We shall be perfectly holy, as the Lord Jesus Christ was during the thirty-three and a half years that He was on earth!
0.114	Never was a particle of wrong found in anything He did, never a particle contrary to the mind of God in anything He said; never was a particle found in all His thoughts, in all His desires, in all His wishes, contrary to the mind of God.
0.115	Everything was found in perfect conformity to the mind of God during the whole time that the blessed Savior was here on earth!
0.116	And so it will be with us.
0.117	We weak ones, feeble ones, shall not always be weak ones, feeble ones, but holy ones, spotless ones, pure ones, lovely ones.
0.118	Yes, lovely ones! Oh, how lovely!
0.119	Because the beauty of Christ is put upon us!
0.120	Oh, how precious these words are; and oh, if we kept them more in mind, if we entered into them, how our hearts would be full of peace and joy all day long and every day.
0.121	Now, it is on account of this that the statement is made, “It does not yet appear what we shall be; but we know that, when He appears, we shall be like Him.”
0.122	We shall be like Him!
0.123	Notice the reason why!
0.124	“We shall be like Him, for we shall see Him as He is!”
0.125	More correctly, “For we shall see Him even as He is.”
0.126	That is, we shall perfectly know the Lord Jesus Christ: in all His work and all His offices, not merely know Him as our Judge.
0.127	That is the way in which the ungodly will have to become acquainted with Him.
0.128	Every human being who is not a believer in Christ will know Him as their Judge, but we shall know Him as our Savior, as our Brother, as our Friend, as our Husband, as our Bridegroom.
0.129	We shall know Him in every one of the offices which He holds for the benefit of the Church of God; and just in proportion as we know the Lord now, we are conformed to Him; we become more and more like Him, even while we are still in the body.
0.130	The more acquainted we are with the Lord Jesus Christ, the more we are like Him; and then in the glory we shall know that Blessed One perfectly, and we shall be perfectly like Him!
0.131	What a bright and blessed prospect this is!
0.132	So our service throughout all eternity will be not only without weakness and weariness, pain and suffering, but completely according to the mind of God, completely in the same spirit in which the Lord Jesus Christ worked while in the body here on earth!
0.133	Precious, bright, glorious prospects are ours!
0.134	It is just because the world is so ignorant, so completely ignorant, of all the glorious things which are the portion of the believer in Christ, that they do not care about the things of God; for if it were known what the blessed position and portion of a child of God really is, everybody would seek to know Him, everybody would care about Him, everybody would believe in Him.
0.135	Now the last point: “And every man who has this hope in Him purifies himself, even as He is pure.”
0.136	First of all, as to the somewhat more correct literal meaning: “Every man” – that is, “everyone” – “who has this hope in Him.”
0.137	The meaning is not, “Has this hope in himself.”
0.138	That is not its meaning; rather, “has this hope regarding the Lord Jesus Christ,” that through faith in Him he will be perfectly like Christ in heaven.
0.139	“Everyone who has this hope in Him, or regarding Him, purifies himself, even as He is pure.”
0.140	That is, as truth in every way tends to increase holiness, so here we repeat the statement again.
0.141	Whoever has this hope regarding the Lord Jesus, to be made like Him in body and soul – everyone who has this hope regarding Him purifies himself.
0.142	It tends to make us increasingly holy; for just as we become acquainted with Christ and see what God has given us in Him, the more clearly, distinctly, and minutely we know this, the more fully holiness is increased in us, so that we shall be satisfied with nothing less than this: that we may continually become more and more Christlike.
0.143	We do not attain to it fully while we are in the body; yet this will be our aim more and more, more and more, more and more – to be like Christ.
0.144	We are not satisfied with having power over our natural, gross sins; we are not satisfied with this, but only with being, in spirit and in mind, more and more Christlike, gentle and loving.
0.145	Oh, how increasingly we seek to attain to this, earnestly desiring it more and more, seeking in every way to become like Christ.
0.146	And though it will never be fully attained while in the body, yet it is impossible to say to what degree we may, even while in the body, become Christlike.
0.147	Now, let this be the great lesson that we learn this evening: that because we are already children of God now, blessing, wonderful blessing, is to be obtained from our Heavenly Father; and that, because of the prospect we have before us, it is impossible to say to what degree we may become Christlike.
0.148	Now, will you who are not believers in Christ always continue in the way you have been going until now?
0.149	Shall there be no change?
0.150	If you continue on the broad way, final destruction will be your portion!
0.151	Do you long to spend a happy eternity together with the Lord in heaven?
0.152	Oh, what delight it will be to many at the last to see that not one of all who are present here is missing in heaven!
0.153	It is a personal interest I have in your spiritual welfare, and out of love for your soul, that I long to meet you in heaven; and oh, how it would increase our joy and delight in heaven at last to find not one missing, to find that this little meditation of ours on the evening of the 11th of April 1897 was not in vain.
0.154	Oh, how precious to find it so at the last!
0.155	And now, is there anyone present who says, “I will still have the world; I will still seek to enjoy the world”?
0.156	You will not be happy through this decision; be quite sure of that.
0.157	Oh, I tried your ways for twenty years and five weeks, and all I ever got was disappointment and increased guilt on my conscience.
0.158	But when I found Jesus, real happiness came.
0.159	Oh, such happiness as I cannot describe.
0.160	That was at the beginning of November 1825, and I have felt it ever since – only with this difference, that the happiness has increased more and more, more and more.
0.161	And that is what God is willing to give to you; for I suppose there is not a greater sinner present here than I was, though only twenty years of age, yet God bestowed this wondrous blessing on me; and what He did for me, and what He did for Paul, and what He did for other sinners, He is willing to do for anyone else.
0.162	Therefore, oh, let it be Christ whom you choose, and not the world any longer; for the world will never prove real, but, if continued in, will bring damnation, and only damnation.
0.163	May God grant His blessing, for Jesus Christ’s sake.
