0.1	It was in July 1829 that I first became acquainted with Mr. Craik.
0.2	What drew me to him was not that we were both nearly twenty-four years of age at that time; nor was it that we had both had a university education; nor was it that we were both, at that time, pursuing the study of the Hebrew language with great love and earnestness; nor was it even that both of us had been brought to the knowledge of the Lord Jesus at about the same time, while at the university; but what it was that drew me to him will be seen in what follows.
0.3	In May 1829, soon after my arrival in England, I was taken very ill.
0.4	My desire then was very strong to depart, so that I might be with my Lord, whom I adore, who had loved me and given Himself for me, the great sinner.
0.5	It pleased God, however, contrary to my expectation, and especially contrary to my desire, to begin to restore me; and in order to complete my recovery, I was medically advised to leave London for a change of air.
0.6	In submission to the will of God I went to Teignmouth; for although the state of heart I was in desired no prolonging of life, I still considered it my duty to use this means.
0.7	While at Teignmouth, I became acquainted with Mr. Craik, and his warmth of heart toward the Lord drew me to him.
0.8	It was this that attracted me.
0.9	As I stayed only a few weeks at Teignmouth, I saw comparatively little of him; but in January 1830 I returned to Teignmouth, and from then on I lived there.
0.10	We were now drawn together more fully; for between July 1829 and January 1830 I had seen the leading truths connected with the second coming of our Lord Jesus; I had grasped the all-sufficiency of the Holy Scriptures as our rule, and of the Holy Spirit as our teacher; I had seen clearly the precious doctrines of the grace of God, in which I had been uninstructed for nearly four years after my conversion; and I had learned the heavenly calling of the Church of Christ, and the resulting position of the believer in this world.
0.11	As these very truths so greatly occupied Mr. Craik’s heart also, we were now soon drawn closely together; and from that time until the day he fell asleep in Jesus, our friendship was intimate and unbroken for thirty-six years.
0.12	The reader will learn from the memoir itself that we remained laboring in the Word in the same locality in Devonshire for about two years and three months; and then, in a very marked way, we were both led at the same time to Bristol, where we have labored together for more than thirty-three years.
0.13	It has often been observed how remarkable it was that we should have labored together so harmoniously for so many years, and that this should have continued to the very last.
0.14	Now, as I write this introduction for the reader’s profit, I will dwell a little on this point.
0.15	It was not because Mr. Craik had no mind of his own and therefore habitually submitted to my judgment; nor was it because I blindly followed him, having no judgment of my own.
0.16	All our Christian friends who knew us were well aware that this was not at all the case; but the reasons were these: When in the year 1832 I saw how some preferred my beloved friend’s ministry to my own, I determined, in the strength of God, to rejoice in this instead of envying him.
0.17	I said, with John the Baptist, “A man can receive nothing unless it is given him from heaven” (John 3:27).
0.18	This resisting of the devil kept our hearts from being separated.
0.19	But this was not all.
0.20	From that time God also honored me in the ministry of the Word, and greatly so; this is mentioned only to show how a double blessing followed my resisting the devil.
0.21	But when, from the beginning of 1839 onward, it pleased the Lord to condescend to bestow such abundant honor on me as He did in connection with the Orphan Houses and the other objects of the Scriptural Knowledge Institution for Home and Abroad, the temptation ran the other way, especially as this work was extended more and more, and the blessing of God resting on it became greater and greater.
0.22	Then my beloved friend, for his part, speaking after the manner of men, had cause for envy.
0.23	But how was it in reality?
0.24	There were few, if any, who more truly rejoiced in all the honor the Lord condescended to put on me than my friend did.
0.25	Still, this was not all.
0.26	This in particular must be added: whatever the spiritual infirmities of my friend or of myself were, there was given to us, throughout the whole thirty-six years of our friendship, an honest purpose to live to God, not to ourselves; to please Him, and not ourselves; and so it came about that our friendship remained unbroken to the end, even though the temptations to alienation of heart, humanly speaking, increased more and more instead of decreasing.
0.27	Our natural makeup of mind and temperament was very different, and yet we had to work together, while about 2,500 believers have been received into fellowship since we first came to Bristol, and while in recent years nearly 1,000 believers have been in fellowship in the church meeting at Bethesda and Salem chapels, among whom we labored.
0.28	Who, then, can doubt the difficulty that constantly stood in the way of this continuance of love and union? But there was help to be found in God, and we found it to the end.
0.29	This is how we parted when I saw my dear friend for the last time.
0.30	After I had kissed him, when I intended to go, he, being too weak to converse any more, said, “Sit down,” and also asked Mrs. Craik to sit down, so that he might look at us, though he could not converse.
0.31	So I sat there silently for a while, and then left.
0.32	This was our last meeting.
0.33	The next day I caught a cold and was kept at home for several days, during which time my dear friend fell asleep.
0.34	The reader will see from the memoir that Mr. Craik had very superior powers of mind; but what made him especially lovely in my estimation were the following features of his character and spiritual attainments:
0.35	1. He was very affectionate.
0.36	2. Like Nathanael of old, he was truly without deceit.
0.37	3. He was particularly conscientious.
0.38	Whatever his weakness or failing in any respect, you could be sure that he acted conscientiously.
0.39	He did what he did because he thought it right.
0.40	Our views concerning certain courses of action differed materially, but I always came back to this: My friend is conscientious; if he only saw as I did, he would surely act differently.
0.41	4. Though endowed by God with such great mental powers, he did not use them to make a name among men, nor to be admired by men, but to throw light on the Holy Scriptures and to set forth the truth.
0.42	As a striking proof of his humility, and of how far he was from seeking the honor of men, I mention the following: In the year 1849 Professor Alexander indicated to him, in the name of the University of St Andrews, that it was intended to confer on him the degree of Doctor of Divinity, or of Doctor of Canon and Civil Law.
0.43	He courteously declined this honor, but recommended for the degree a Christian gentleman who had labored much in biblical literature, as it might be of great use to him as an author.
0.44	The latter was done, and the degree of LL.D. was conferred on this gentleman. Some years ago the same university repeated to Mr. Craik their former proposal and desire, and a second time my friend humbly declined the honor.
0.45	Truly this is a striking proof that, whatever momentary failings to the contrary there may have been, he was steadfastly purposed in his heart not to seek the honor that comes from man, but to commend himself to God as His servant.
0.46	5. Mr. Craik showed great sympathy to those who were in trial and affliction: his affectionate heart felt deeply for the sufferings of others.
0.47	6. Mr. Craik was eminently a man of prayer, and a man given to the study of the Word of God.
0.48	Such prayerfulness regarding the Holy Scriptures, such true digging into the Word as for hidden treasures, such meditation on the Word as he was given to, I never knew to be surpassed by any servant of Christ.
0.49	The chief loss that the Church of Christ at large has sustained in his removal is not merely that he was a lovely, amiable, truly spiritually minded Christian to all who knew him intimately, and an earnest, devoted preacher of the Lord Jesus; but that he was one who had truly studied the oracles of God on his knees, with great diligence.
0.50	Among all the thousands of believers whom I know, there is none whose judgment on any part of truth I would have valued more than that of my departed friend, because of his great caution, his prayerfulness, his diligence in comparing Scripture with Scripture, his humility of soul, his very considerable knowledge of Greek and Hebrew, and his habit of reading the Scriptures in their original languages.
0.51	Concerning Mr. Craik’s health, as one who knew him so intimately and so long, I must state that when he was about forty years old he looked far healthier than when I first knew him at twenty-four years of age, and this was even more the case when he was about fifty.
0.52	He was never strong, and, like many men of great mind, he was not careful enough to make the best of the health and strength he had.
0.53	He would generally eat rapidly and, though suffering from weak digestion, neglect to chew his food properly.
0.54	Moreover, when he felt fairly well, he would forget his constitutional weakness and labor mentally beyond his strength.
0.55	This is not stated to cast any blame on that excellent man who is no longer among us, but his friend states it as a warning to his fellow believers; for life, health, and strength of body or mind are entrusted to us as precious talents to be used for God.
0.56	This lack of habitually acting with caution regarding his health, and his overtaxing of his mind, no doubt produced at certain times a measure of nervous depression, of which the reader will find indications in his diary, and which makes Mr. Craik appear almost to be a different man from what he was known to be in his ordinary public life, in which he generally showed great cheerfulness.
0.57	Having referred to his health, I cannot help adding that it is my full conviction that my friend’s constitutional weakness was intended by God as a special blessing to him.
0.58	Though Mr. Craik was a very humble man, and though it was his earnest and habitual desire to use his mental powers for the glory of God, yet no one could know him intimately without being aware that his natural tendency was to pursue the cultivation of his mind with too great an earnestness and natural fondness, which, but for his weak constitution, might have become a great snare to his inner man.
0.59	As a check, therefore, the Lord so mercifully gave him this powerful mind together with a weak body, so that he might not indulge too much in the cultivation of his mental powers.
0.60	I add this further with regard to his health.
0.61	I never knew anyone who by constitution shrank from suffering as much as he did.
0.62	He often spoke to me on this subject.
0.63	And yet this very man was, for nearly seven months before his death, not only a very great sufferer, but was also greatly sustained under his great sufferings.
0.64	On Christmas Day 1865, as I sat at his bedside longer than usual, because I had more time than I generally did, I suddenly remembered what he had so often spoken to me about, and then told him that now the strength of the Lord was made manifest in his constitutional shrinking from pain and suffering.
0.65	He saw it and acknowledged it.
0.66	And truly the Lord greatly sustained His suffering servant, and did so to the end.
0.67	Without complaining he passed through his sufferings, though he prayed and longed to be delivered from them.
0.68	And at last he was delivered.
0.69	Peacefully leaning on Jesus, he fell asleep.
0.70	His poor friend who writes this remains.
0.71	For now the Lord allows me to serve Him on earth.
0.72	Pray, Christian reader, that whether this time is long or short, I may be enabled to spend it truly to the honor of God.
