0.1	The occasion that gave rise to this letter was this: Philemon, who lived at Colosse (for this can plainly be seen from the last chapter of Paul’s Epistle to the Colossians.
0.2	The letter to the church at Colosse was written at the same time as this letter to Philemon.
0.3	Onesimus and another brother were the bearers of the letter to the church at Colosse and of this private letter to Philemon)—Philemon, who lived at Colosse, had a slave by the name of Onesimus, and this slave, in his ungodly state, ran away from his master Philemon, and in the providence of God, as we say, he comes to Rome.
0.4	Rome was the greatest place in the whole world at that time.
0.5	In all probability this slave said to himself, “If I could only get to Rome, what prospects there would be before me.”
0.6	This may have occurred to him after he left his master.
0.7	He wanders on from Asia Minor to Rome with bright prospects before him.
0.8	“Oh, what pleasures I shall have in Rome; what sights I shall see in Rome; what companionship I shall meet with in Rome!”
0.9	No doubt some such thoughts passed through his mind.
0.10	And what happened in Rome?
0.11	He was converted. So God allows men to go their own way; so God allows men to follow the desires of their own heart, and if they could, they would run still farther and farther away from Him.
0.12	But God says, “Thus far you shall go, and no farther.”
0.13	Many have gone to London and to other places, not to get good for their souls, but in the service of the devil; but God laid hold of them there, in the very way they least expected, and converted them.
0.14	Again, Onesimus might have come to Rome and never seen Paul.
0.15	He might have spent fifty years in Rome and never seen Paul; but God has purposes of grace and mercy toward him, and in His good providence He orders it so that he falls in with Paul, so that he must become acquainted with this Paul.
0.16	And who was Paul at this time in Rome?
0.17	Not a great man in the eyes of the world.
0.18	Truly a great man in one sense, and yet in the greatest obscurity in another sense.
0.19	Paul was at this time a prisoner for the gospel’s sake.
0.20	Paul did not walk about in the marketplace, the Forum, where the great and wealthy of the capital gathered.
0.21	He was in prison, with a soldier guarding him, and yet God so orders it that this runaway slave must fall in with Paul, and that Paul shall become a blessed instrument in the hands of God for the conversion of his soul.
0.22	How full of encouragement this should be to us all!
0.23	Some have dear ones who are far from Christ—fathers, mothers, brothers, sisters, and other relatives—and many of them are apparently getting farther and farther from God, caring less and less about the things of God and more and more about the things of this world.
0.24	Go on, beloved in Christ, believingly and patiently bringing their cases before the Lord, and you will yet have the joy of finding that your prayers have not been in vain.
0.25	There is every reason to believe that Philemon, the godly master of this slave, was concerned about his spiritual welfare; but all seems lost when this slave runs away, and yet God follows him and lays hold of him at the very time when you and I would least have thought he would be brought to the Lord.
0.26	Let us read and meditate on this letter to Philemon.
0.27	Verse 1: “Paul, a prisoner of Jesus Christ, and Timothy our brother, to Philemon our dearly beloved and fellow worker.”
0.28	He regarded this Philemon as one who labored with him in the gospel.
0.29	He speaks of him and treats him as a fellow worker.
0.30	Verse 2: “And to our beloved Apphia (the wife of Philemon), and to Archippus our fellow soldier (this Archippus was a brother who labored in the word and doctrine at Colosse), and to the church in your house.”
0.31	The house of Archippus was the meeting place of the church, for at that time churches and chapels were not built, but they met in private houses or in places that were fitted up for the purpose.
0.32	We have an instance of this in the twentieth chapter of Acts, where Paul was preaching in an upper room.
0.33	It was not the aim of the disciples to have costly buildings resembling the temple at Jerusalem.
0.34	The first hundred and twenty met in an upper room.
0.35	So here the church at Colosse had the house of Philemon as its meeting place.
0.36	Verse 3: “Grace to you.”
0.37	You notice how this comes in in the various letters addressed to the churches, and there must be a reason for it.
0.38	It is not a mere common phrase that is brought in.
0.39	The reason seems to be this: we need to be reminded that grace has been bestowed on us by God through Christ Jesus, and that He is willing to bestow more and more blessing.
0.40	And so also we need to be reminded continually of the fact that we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ.
0.41	I am now speaking only to those who trust in the Lord Jesus Christ—who, having passed sentence on themselves and condemned themselves in the sight of God as guilty sinners, are trusting in the atoning death of the Lord Jesus Christ as the one ground of acceptance before God.
0.42	Verses 4–7: “I thank my God, making mention of you always in my prayers, hearing of your love and faith, which you have toward the Lord Jesus and toward all saints; that the communication of your faith may become effective by the acknowledging of every good thing which is in you in Christ Jesus.
0.43	For we have great joy and consolation in your love, because the hearts of the saints are refreshed by you, brother.”
0.44	This is what the apostle Paul writes regarding the spiritual state of Philemon, and a high commendation it is—a most blessed man of God he was; and yet someone says, “He had slaves!”
0.45	Yes, he had slaves.
0.46	But we must always keep this before us: having slaves at that time was not connected with such awful cruelty as the slavery of modern days.
0.47	Many of these people were idolaters, and there were many things connected with slavery that were quite wrong.
0.48	Yet, ordinarily speaking, we have no reason to believe that there were the cruelties of the slaveholders of modern days.
0.49	In most of the instances where we read the word “servant,” it means slave—those who belonged to the master; but in not one single instance is there a hint given such as, “How wicked you are, how cruel and abominable your conduct!”
0.50	If the love of Christ constrained them to set all free, the apostles would have rejoiced in it; and when these slaves had the opportunity of becoming free, they were to accept it thankfully and not reject it.
0.51	The apostle Paul commends Philemon on account of the blessed spiritual state he was in.
0.52	He says, “I thank my God,” and this particularly with reference to the fifth verse, “hearing of your love and faith.”
0.53	This was a subject for praise and thanksgiving in Paul’s heart with regard to Philemon.
0.54	This is rather a remarkable expression, “faith and love toward the saints.”
0.55	You can see what it means that he had love; but what is the meaning of this, that he had faith toward the saints?
0.56	Have you ever thought about this?
0.57	It is deeply important that we seek to search into the meaning of what we read in the Divine testimony.
0.58	The meaning of it is evidently this: looking on them with faith, seeing in them that they are the children of God, and treating them as such—as the children of God.
0.59	Whenever we are enabled to look on one another as the children of God, whenever we are enabled to see Christ in one another, that is exercising faith toward one another.
0.60	He also prayed that God would help him further, and from this we should gather instruction: as Paul prayed for Philemon, so we should pray for each other.
0.61	This was the subject of his prayer: “that the communication of your faith may become effective by the acknowledging of every good thing which is in you in Christ Jesus.”
0.62	In other words, this means: My dear Philemon, I pray that you, having received faith, may go on; that this may energize you, may become effective in you, and give you still further and further strength to acknowledge everything that is good in any of the saints.
0.63	And he adds this to his praise in the seventh verse: “For we have great joy and consolation in your love, because the hearts of the saints are refreshed by you, brother.”
0.64	What a high commendation of this dear man!
0.65	Evidently he was one in a position of comparative wealth and prosperity, and Paul says, “we have great joy,” because on account of the holy, godly walk of this blessed man of God, Philemon, the hearts of the saints were refreshed.
0.66	Do we, the children of God, aim at this—namely, that we become a spiritual refreshment to the saints, that the saints are refreshed by our godly life?
0.67	This is what we must aim at.
0.68	When we give way to our natural tendencies, to our temper, and to other things that are hateful to God, we do not strengthen the hands of our fellow disciples; but when we seek to do the things that are according to the mind of God, we strengthen each other’s hands in God.
0.69	In bringing glory to God, we also help along the life and conduct of other children of God.
0.70	It is just as with an army: if one regiment acquits itself well, the other regiments are strengthened by it; and if one regiment turns its back on the enemy, the other regiments are weakened by it.
0.71	So it is with the Church of God.
0.72	Verses 8–14: “Therefore, though I could be very bold in Christ to order you to do what is proper, yet for love’s sake I rather plead with you, being such a one as Paul the aged, and now also a prisoner of Jesus Christ.
0.73	I plead with you for my son Onesimus, whom I have begotten in my chains, who in time past was unprofitable to you, but now is profitable to you and to me; whom I have sent back. You therefore receive him, that is, my own heart. I would have kept him with me, so that in your place he might have ministered to me in the bonds of the gospel; but without your consent I would do nothing, so that your good deed would not be as it were of necessity, but willingly.”
0.74	An exquisite statement this, and of the deepest importance.
0.75	In brief it was just this: Onesimus was converted; Paul was a prisoner in chains for the gospel.
0.76	What a comfort this good man would have been in waiting on him!
0.77	He longed to have someone to wait on him.
0.78	Paul might have said, “This Onesimus is my son in the faith, and therefore I shall simply act as I have a right to act; I will just keep him and let him wait on me.”
0.79	He might have said, “I am an apostle, and for the gospel’s sake I am here in prison, and it is right and fitting that my child in the faith should wait on me.”
0.80	Not so, not so.
0.81	This was not the mind of Christ, and this blessed man of God sought to act according to the mind of Christ.
0.82	He might have said, “I am an aged servant of Christ, an aged apostle, and I have labored more abundantly than any of them; and since this runaway slave has been converted through me, it is quite right that I should have him to wait on me.”
0.83	Not so, because this would be by constraint.
0.84	He would not know whether it was done willingly and cheerfully on Philemon’s part.
0.85	He desired that this man of God might do what he did cheerfully and willingly.
0.86	Oh, how deeply important it is to keep this before us!
0.87	The principle is just this.
0.88	Suppose someone said, “Now I am in great need, and so-and-so is my brother in Christ, and so-and-so has plenty of money, and he ought to give to me because I am a poor brother; he is bound by the word of God to do it, and I have a right simply to demand it of him.”
0.89	Is this the mind of Christ?
0.90	It is the mind of the flesh, and not the mind of Christ.
0.91	You never find such an instance on the part of a man of God in the epistles or the gospels.
0.92	It is quite true that whoever has this world’s goods, and sees his brother in need, and shuts up his heart of compassion, cannot have the love of God in him; but it is also true, on the other hand, that it is unbecoming for a poor brother to insist on it.
0.93	The apostle Paul could have insisted on his rights, but he did not do so.
0.94	“Who in time past was unprofitable to you.”
0.95	This brings out the character of Onesimus: a good-for-nothing man, a bad fellow.
0.96	Philemon had lost nothing.
0.97	“But now profitable to you and to me.”
0.98	Because he was a child of God, a brother in Christ, a member of the body.
0.99	That brings out another deeply important principle.
0.100	There is no child of God who is not of some good.
0.101	Someone might say, “Here is a very ignorant person who cannot put two letters together; what good is such a one to the Church of Christ?”
0.102	If in no other way, then by giving others the opportunity to exercise grace.
0.103	Here is one who is helplessly confined to his bed year after year.
0.104	That person can pray; that person can still show the mind of Christ to anyone who comes to see him.
0.105	And even if none of these things were so, such people still give those who are in health and strength the opportunity to show love to them.
0.106	We should always look on one another as precious in the sight of Christ.
0.107	Our natural tendency is this: to see the old Adam in one another, to see the failings and shortcomings in one another; and the result is misery to one another and dishonor to God.
0.108	O beloved in Christ, let us aim to see Christ in one another.
0.109	Onesimus was profitable to the chief of the apostles—just think of this!
0.110	He could not be a useless one, because he was a member of the body of Christ, and Christ can have no member of His body who is altogether useless.
0.111	“You therefore receive him, that is, my own heart.”
0.112	Philemon was to receive him as if Paul himself had come to him.
0.113	And oh, how would Paul have been received?
0.114	“O beloved brother Paul, how glad I am to see you here again!” he would say, falling on his neck and kissing him many times.
0.115	Now Paul says, “Just as you would have received me if I were to come, so, beloved Philemon, receive this runaway slave, because he is your brother in Christ, and you will spend a happy eternity with him.”
0.116	“But without your consent I would do nothing.”
0.117	But I must first know that this pleases you, that you are satisfied with it, that this is according to your wish and will.
0.118	How deeply important it is to keep this before us in the Divine life, that we show the mind of Christ.
0.119	Just as that blessed One did not seek to please Himself, but to be the servant of others, so we must imitate that blessed One.
0.120	“For perhaps he departed for a season for this reason, that you should receive him forever.” “Forever”—never to be separated any more.
0.121	And that brings before us the precious truth that the disciples of the Lord Jesus are bound together for eternity, are knit together for eternity.
0.122	And that, you see, is so precious.
0.123	There may come separation by distance, there may come separation by death; ah, but it is only in appearance.
0.124	We are bound together in the bonds of love, not for time only, but for eternity.
0.125	All the poor sinners who rest on the atoning death of the Lord Jesus form one holy, happy, blessed family for eternity, and there will be no separation for eternity.
0.126	Do we belong to that family?
0.127	Do we believe in the Lord Jesus?
0.128	How many among us belong to the heavenly family?
0.129	How many have decided yet?
0.130	Put this question to yourselves, you dear young men, you dear girls from the Orphan Houses, and all who are present here.
0.131	Oh, the blessedness of belonging to the heavenly family!
0.132	Oh, the blessedness of belonging to the members of Christ!
0.133	Then let come what may—one in Christ, and one in Christ forever!
