0.1	“Who forgives all your iniquities; who heals all your diseases; who redeems your life from destruction; who crowns you with lovingkindness and tender mercies; who satisfies your mouth with good things, so that your youth is renewed like the eagle’s.”—Psalm 103:3–5
0.2	In this Psalm, which I read to you, we should particularly notice the stress the Psalmist lays on praise: “Bless the Lord (or Jehovah), O my soul, and all that is within me.”
0.3	His soul is engaged in the service.
0.4	All!—the affections of his heart, the powers of his mind—all!
0.5	This is what we are to aim at.
0.6	Not that we do not thank the Lord—I trust we do—but that it may be more spiritual in character, that the heart may be engaged more and more, and all that is within us be occupied with praising, adoring, and magnifying the Lord.
0.7	Then there is a remarkable addition to this: “Bless His holy name.”
0.8	This is something only believers can be engaged in.
0.9	By nature, we do not care about the holiness of God.
0.10	By nature, man likes to gratify himself, and would have God be like himself.
0.11	By nature, the attribute of holiness is the last one we care about.
0.12	But when we are born again, when we are renewed, when we have spiritual life, a longing after holiness is begotten in our hearts, and we rejoice in the fact that God is a holy Being.
0.13	Then we have the prospect of one day being like Him.
0.14	Only a child of God takes a real interest in admiring the holiness of God and in rendering praise to Him for it.
0.15	Then the Psalmist adds, in the second verse: “Bless Jehovah, O my soul, and do not forget all His benefits.”
0.16	We are in danger of forgetting the mercies of God.
0.17	We are ready to speak about our trials, our difficulties, our bereavements, our crosses; but are we just as ready to speak of and admire the goodness of God, and His mercies bestowed on us in countless ways all the days of our life?
0.18	This was something the Psalmist was particularly concerned about.
0.19	Now to our text:
0.20	“Who forgives all your iniquities.”
0.21	This is the first blessing the Psalmist lists.
0.22	It is the first mercy he especially desired not to forget.
0.23	Notice particularly that among all the blessings this is the first.
0.24	And is this not the choicest blessing we have received?
0.25	Is there one single blessing to be compared with this?
0.26	What are all our blessings in business—and they are something to be grateful for—in comparison with the forgiveness of our sins?
0.27	What is all the peace and quietness in the family—and these too are something to be grateful for—compared with the forgiveness of our sins?
0.28	What is the soundness of bodily health—for which we should be thankful—in comparison with the forgiveness of our sins?
0.29	What is the vigor and strength of mind with which we are blessed, in comparison with the forgiveness of our sins?
0.30	It is as nothing in comparison with it.
0.31	The Psalmist puts this blessing first because it is the choicest, the chief, and the most precious a human being can have.
0.32	Let me ask affectionately: Have we all obtained the forgiveness of our sins?
0.33	That is the point! That is the point!
0.34	Are we all pardoned sinners?
0.35	We are all sinners, without exception.
0.36	Are we all pardoned sinners?
0.37	Have we all obtained the forgiveness of our sins?
0.38	That is the point!
0.39	I have no doubt many hundreds here have; but at the same time I cannot help feeling that there are many who have not.
0.40	Now this is the momentous point: To which of the two classes do we belong?
0.41	Pardoned sinners—sinners whose load of guilt has been removed; or unpardoned sinners, unable to look up to God peacefully and calmly through the atonement of the Lord Jesus Christ?
0.42	Ask yourselves before God: To which class do I belong?
0.43	If I am not pardoned, I am without peace; I cannot look forward peacefully and calmly to eternity, and I do not know what the end of my course will be.
0.44	It is a fearful thing to go on day by day unpardoned.
0.45	This leads to the question: How can we obtain the forgiveness of our sins?
0.46	Simply by laying hold, through faith, of the atonement of the Lord Jesus Christ.
0.47	God, in the riches of His grace, instead of sending us to the place of perdition as we deserved, laid all the punishment due for our countless transgressions on His Son, the Lord Jesus Christ.
0.48	Him He sent into the world, so that in our place and stead He might work out a righteousness for us by fulfilling the whole law of God; so that poor guilty sinners who trust in Him will be regarded by God as if they had lived the holy and spotless life of the Lord Jesus Christ.
0.49	The believing sinner, standing before God in the righteousness of Christ—hiding himself, as he does, in the righteousness of the Lord Jesus Christ worked out for the poor sinner who trusts in Him—is accepted by Him.
0.50	In our place the Lord Jesus Christ bore every particle of the punishment that we wicked, guilty sinners ought to have endured.
0.51	Now God looks to us, not to do something to complete the work of salvation, but to accept what He so graciously provides for the sinner in the person of His Son, whose righteousness He accepts for the sinner.
0.52	But when the sinner believes in the Lord Jesus Christ, a different life begins: he seeks to please Christ, he seeks to adorn His doctrine, he seeks to walk according to His mind.
0.53	He does this not to be saved by it, or to add to the work of the Lord Jesus Christ.
0.54	But having been saved through faith, having obtained forgiveness, and having been accepted in the righteousness of the Lord Jesus Christ worked out for sinners, he seeks to please God.
0.55	This is the way to obtain forgiveness—simply trusting in Jesus, and so believing in Jesus.
0.56	Whoever does this obtains forgiveness.
0.57	Another important point is the knowledge of our forgiveness.
0.58	We are not to wait for this knowledge until we die, much less are we to wait for it until the day of judgment.
0.59	The blessing is to be had now, is to be known now, is something to be enjoyed now.
0.60	He who is without it cannot be very happy for any length of time.
0.61	It is this which brings the peace and joy of the Holy Spirit into the heart—the knowledge that, wicked and guilty as we are, our sins are forgiven.
0.62	My beloved Christian friends, do we all enjoy the forgiveness of our sins?
0.63	I trust none of you say it cannot be had.
0.64	It certainly can. This was the blessing the first Christians enjoyed.
0.65	They knew in whom they believed: that in Him they had “redemption through His blood, even the forgiveness of sins.”
0.66	They had this statement set before them concerning the Lord Jesus Christ: “To Him all the prophets give witness, that through His name whoever believes in Him shall receive remission of sins.”
0.67	So every poor sinner who believes in Jesus obtains the forgiveness of sins.
0.68	This truly is a blessing to be had now.
0.69	If any of you are without this blessing, give the Lord no rest until you know that your sins are forgiven.
0.70	It truly is to be had and enjoyed now, for salvation brings present blessing with it.
0.71	This is one of the blessings connected with our believing in the Lord Jesus Christ—to obtain the knowledge of forgiveness.
0.72	Notice further the statement of the Psalmist: not “Who forgives some of your iniquities,” but ALL.
0.73	That is so precious.
0.74	It is not that five hundred of our sins are forgiven, or five thousand, but every one; so that though they are countless, every one is forgiven.
0.75	Just think—vile and guilty as we are, every sin of everyone who believes in the Lord Jesus Christ is forgiven.
0.76	Do you enjoy it?
0.77	I do enjoy the forgiveness of my sins.
0.78	Not because I have very strong feelings.
0.79	I do not rest on feelings.
0.80	I take God at His word.
0.81	I rest on His word: “Whoever believes in Him shall not perish, but have eternal life.”
0.82	I believe in Jesus; therefore I have been pardoned.
0.83	I have had no dream or vision about it.
0.84	Some people think that unless, by some strange vision or other, they see Jesus hanging on the cross in some corner of the room, they must remain in doubt.
0.85	I have had no such vision.
0.86	For fifty years I have never had a single minute’s doubt about the forgiveness of my sins.
0.87	For these years I have been a believer, and all this time the word I have referred to, and on which I rest, has been written in the Book, and by it I know my sins are forgiven.
0.88	Every believer who is willing to take God at His word has a right to regard himself as a pardoned sinner, as a forgiven sinner.
0.89	This is a blessing, a great blessing, to know that all our sins are forgiven.
0.90	Suppose now our sins were just 9,090, and suppose we had forgiveness for 9,089—just one single sin unforgiven.
0.91	What then? This one single sin would bring us to the place of perdition.
0.92	There is no trifling with sin.
0.93	We must be perfectly without sin—hiding ourselves in the merits of the Lord Jesus Christ, and fully pardoned—or we are unclean and cannot come into His presence.
0.94	Therefore see the blessedness of this statement of the Psalmist: “Who forgives ALL your iniquities.”
0.95	All gone! Oh, the blessedness of this!
0.96	Every one gone! Sins of action, sins of word, sins of thought, sins of feeling, sins of desire, sins of purpose, sins of inclination—all gone, as surely as we put our trust in the Lord Jesus Christ for the salvation of our souls.
0.97	Now comes a point to which I particularly wish to refer, for the instruction of Christians, and especially of young believers.
0.98	We read, “Who FORGIVES.”
0.99	This shows that forgiveness is something going on now.
0.100	Christians may say: Sometimes we have statements in the New Testament as if our sins were all forgiven, and sometimes as if we needed to obtain forgiveness; and this passage, “Who forgives,” seems as if forgiveness were going on.
0.101	The explanation is this.
0.102	In the position in which we stand as sinners—being by nature guilty criminals—the moment we believe in the Lord Jesus Christ we obtain the forgiveness of all our sins; and in the matter of our salvation, the thing is done once for all.
0.103	But then we pass out of the old relationship of guilty criminals toward the righteous Judge into the position of children; and in this relationship of children, though the matter of our salvation is settled, yet in that relationship of children, whenever we fail—as is more or less the case day by day—and the Holy Spirit makes us conscious of our failure, we have to own before God, in childlike simplicity, that in such a way we have not behaved ourselves, that we have left this thing undone, or that we have done that thing improperly.
0.104	In childlike simplicity we are to make confession before the Lord; then that word comes in: “If we confess our sins, He is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness”; and there is a necessity for the High-Priestly office of the Lord Jesus Christ.
0.105	As far as the matter of our salvation is concerned, when He died He could say, “It is finished”; and He then ascended as the great High Priest, still to point, on the sinner’s behalf, to the efficacy of His blood.
0.106	It is in this latter sense—in our position as children—that we need to make confession whenever we err or fail, to obtain the Fatherly forgiveness granted us; and this will be ours as surely as we confess. I trust this will serve as the explanation for my dear Christian friends.
0.107	“Who heals all your diseases.”
0.108	This is the next blessing the Psalmist desired to keep in mind.
0.109	Here we do not mean to say that the diseases of the body are excluded; for if anyone is cured of any bodily disease, it is not by the skill of the doctor, or by the powerful nature of the medicine, but by the blessing of God on the skill of the doctor.
0.110	Still, I judge that the special point referred to here is spiritual disease.
0.111	You remember what Isaiah said at the beginning of his prophecies: “From the sole of the foot even to the head there is no soundness, but wounds, and bruises, and putrefying sores.”
0.112	We all know that this did not refer to the bodies of the Israelites—that they were not in that loathsome state as regards the body—but that the reference was to their spiritual diseases.
0.113	That is the case with all sinners, at all times, and under all circumstances.
0.114	If we are spiritually pure, it must come from the Lord.
0.115	Now we have particularly to remember here that the poor sinner who trusts in the Lord Jesus Christ, the moment he does so, is, as it were unconsciously, putting himself under the infinitely wise and gracious Physician.
0.116	That blessed One takes him up and puts him into His own hospital, His own infirmary, and will not let him go until he is perfectly cured.
0.117	And as you all know, there is no such thing as a discharge from that hospital or infirmary on account of incurable disease, as is commonly the case among men; but the patient is cared for until he is perfectly free from spiritual disease.
0.118	The moment we are there, the cure is going on.
0.119	This very meeting is intended, by the blessing of Jesus, to do something toward that cure, to help us out of the diseased state.
0.120	And this is the prospect of the weakest: that as surely as he believes in Jesus, as surely as he is not willfully living in sin, so surely will he finally be brought into that state in which he will be altogether free from sin.
0.121	We have been laid hold of by God to be conformed to the image of His Son, to be at last altogether like Him, altogether holy, altogether free from spiritual disease.
0.122	Pride will be completely gone; irritability, covetousness, worldly-mindedness will all be gone.
0.123	We shall be gentle and lovely, pure and holy—just like Jesus.
0.124	Oh, the blessed prospect, that Jesus will not give us up until we are altogether free from our spiritual diseases!
0.125	Then this will be fulfilled: “Who heals all your diseases.”
0.126	Such is His discipline and care that day by day something will be done toward this complete cure; and we should say to ourselves, Have I made some progress today?
0.127	Am I a little freer from disease today than I was yesterday?
0.128	Am I somewhat more conformed to Jesus today?
0.129	At the new year we should say, Have I made more progress during the last year than in the previous one? For the will of the Lord concerning us is that we should be like Jesus at the last; and that the will of God should only need to be presented to us, and instantly, in our inmost souls, we should be ready to do it.
0.130	The Psalmist desired to be grateful to God that He was carrying on this cure.
0.131	“Who redeems your life from destruction.”
0.132	This is true in a variety of ways.
0.133	As regards natural life: If God did not watch over us, what would become of us?
0.134	We are constantly exposed to the loss of our life.
0.135	This is particularly so in the case of little children.
0.136	When you look at the little children by the dozen in the neighborhood of the Tabernacle, and the carts and carriages going by, who does not see that God watches over them?
0.137	How true as to natural life: “Who redeems your life from destruction.”
0.138	Then when we go on a journey, how exposed our life is to danger.
0.139	And even if we go on no journey, but lie on our beds, we are continually exposed to the loss of our life.
0.140	How often a stack of chimneys has fallen, and people have been crushed instantly!
0.141	But there is more in it than this.
0.142	Our whole life was to be for the glory of God.
0.143	Now, unless we had believed in Jesus—either as the Messiah who was to come, or in Him who had come—this life given to us would have been spent in hell.
0.144	Our life has indeed been redeemed from destruction.
0.145	But as regards those who are not yet believers in the Lord Jesus Christ, their life, given to them for the glory of Christ and to be enjoyed throughout eternity, is still liable to be spent in hell.
0.146	See to it that your life is redeemed from destruction; for unless you are a believer in the Lord Jesus Christ, it is not yet fully true that your life is redeemed from destruction.
0.147	Further: we who are believers in the Lord Jesus Christ, who desire to live for Christ—suppose we had been left to ourselves since we believed—we would have gone back.
0.148	We owe it to the grace and mercy and faithfulness of God that we are on the Lord’s side this day, and that we have not gone back again into the world.
0.149	Therefore, how deeply important it is to feel grateful that we have been upheld, and that we have the word, “He who has begun a good work in you will perform it until the day of Jesus Christ,” and that He will never leave us nor forsake us.
0.150	How blessed, how glorious this prospect is!
0.151	“Who crowns you with lovingkindness and tender mercies.”
0.152	This was the next mercy for which the Psalmist desired to be especially grateful.
0.153	We should have a clear understanding of the figure used here.
0.154	Whenever a figure is used in the Scriptures, we should seek to understand it clearly, so as to be able to know the meaning of the spiritual truth expressed under it.
0.155	The figure here is “crowning.”
0.156	We all know, with regard to crowning, that not a dozen persons in a country are crowned, nor half a dozen, but that one individual is singled out, on whose head the crown is placed as a mark of honor and power.
0.157	But this individual, singled out and taken from among the rest, is placed in this position of honor and power by the crown put on his head.
0.158	Precisely so our heavenly Father deals with us who believe in the Lord Jesus Christ; we are not a particle better than the vilest.
0.159	We are just as wicked as the poor prisoners on the Cut, or in the Bridewell, or at Lawford’s Gate.
0.160	In ourselves we are just as bad as they are, just as bad as the vilest in the city.
0.161	When we see drunkards or prisoners being carried off by the police officers, we should say, But for the grace of God I would now be a drunkard.
0.162	But for the grace of God I would be in the hands of those policemen.
0.163	And this we should never lose sight of to the last, so that the heart may be filled with love and gratitude to God more and more, and to the Lord Jesus Christ more and more, more and more; for had we been left to ourselves we would have been wallowing in sin, and in a far worse state.
0.164	And it is this particular point to which the Psalmist refers when he says, “Crowns you with lovingkindness and tender mercies”—lovingkindness meaning grace.
0.165	In the Old Testament, going to the Hebrew, it means grace.
0.166	It is to the grace and mercy of God that we are indebted.
0.167	But for the grace and mercy of God we would be like the vilest of the vile.
0.168	All this we should keep in mind, to keep us from high-mindedness and from thinking ourselves better than others, and so that the heart may remain filled with love and gratitude to the Lord Jesus Christ.
0.169	Now there is one more mercy remaining for which the Psalmist desired to be grateful.
0.170	Precious Lord Jesus Christ, use the mouth of Your servant now; by Your Spirit direct Your poor servant to bring out those very points which the beloved disciples especially need to help them.
0.171	Help Your servant, and let the Word come, not in word only but in the power of the Holy Spirit, so that it will not be forgotten to the end of the life of these dear disciples here.
0.172	And Your servant asks it for Your dear name’s sake.
0.173	“Who satisfies your mouth with good things, so that your youth is renewed like the eagle’s.”
0.174	Notice the figure again—the old eagles casting their feathers; and when this has been done, their strength is truly renewed, and they become strong and powerful again.
0.175	This was the case with those advanced in years.
0.176	So the Psalmist, looking at himself, admired what the Lord had done for him.
0.177	He does not refer to food, though that is included; and for every crumb of bread and drop of water we should be exceedingly grateful, for the body is strong and vigorous through the food given us.
0.178	The Psalmist meant to say that his mouth was satisfied with good things, as the eagle’s was, by means of good food.
0.179	But more than this: he was referring to spiritual food, through which his spiritual strength was renewed.
0.180	Now, beloved Christian friends, this is the momentous point.
0.181	There is no necessity for aged believers to become more and more lifeless and careless and worldly-minded.
0.182	As the Psalmist grew old he did not become very worldly-minded, he did not become lifeless and cold and carnal, but his spiritual strength was renewed.
0.183	So it may be with us.
0.184	It is a mistake to suppose that for two or three years after conversion we may be in a healthy and lively state, and that after we have known the Lord five or ten years we may expect to become cold and dead and formal, and to go back again little by little.
0.185	It may be far otherwise, it ought to be far otherwise; and if it is not, we are not living to the praise and glory of God.
0.186	The Psalmist in his advanced years was happier in the Lord, more spiritually minded; he had more spiritual power and vigor at the end than he had at the beginning.
0.187	Oh, my beloved younger brothers and sisters, you have before you not the prospect of dull and miserable days, but of brighter and happier days.
0.188	And here, for the honor and glory of God, I bear my own testimony.
0.189	I am happier now, after being a believer for nearly fifty-one years, than I was fifty years ago; far happier than I was forty years ago, than I was thirty years ago, than I was twenty years ago, than I was ten years ago.
0.190	As time has gone on, my peace and joy and happiness in the Lord have increased more and more, instead of fading away more and more.
0.191	Why do I refer to this?
0.192	Not to boast, for it is all by the grace of God, but to encourage my younger fellow believers to expect greater things from the Lord, who delights in giving abundantly.
0.193	And as you sometimes sing, “More and more, more and more,” there is yet more to come.
0.194	Let us look out for it, for God delights to give more grace.
0.195	It is the joy and delight of His heart to give more and more.
0.196	Why should it not be so?
0.197	Why should we not have the best things in the last part of life?
0.198	Has God changed? Far from it!
0.199	Has the Bible changed?
0.200	No! We have the same blessed word.
0.201	Is the power of the Holy Spirit less?
0.202	Far from it; nothing of the kind!
0.203	The Lord Jesus Christ is always ready to bless.
0.204	The word we now have is the whole revelation.
0.205	And our heavenly Father has the same heart toward His children.
0.206	Therefore there is nothing to hinder our being happier as time goes on with us.
0.207	If we are not happier, what is the reason?
0.208	There must be a reason, and we should ask ourselves why we are not getting happier and happier.
0.209	Now, in brotherly love and affection, I would give a few hints to my younger fellow believers as to the way to keep up spiritual enjoyment.
0.210	It is absolutely necessary, in order that happiness in the Lord may continue, that the Scriptures be read regularly.
0.211	They are God’s appointed means for the nourishment of the inner man.
0.212	If the Word of God is neglected, you are not making progress, but you are spiritual babes, and remain so.
0.213	That is not all.
0.214	You will become spiritual dwarfs! You will become spiritual dwarfs! Spiritual dwarfs!
0.215	Instead of living to the glory of God, you will be living to dishonor Him.
0.216	You see, we are left here after conversion to live for the benefit of the world.
0.217	Only a few of the children of God are taken to heaven directly after their conversion; the rest are left to live here for a while for the glory of God.
0.218	This cannot be unless we regularly give ourselves to the Word of God, unless we come to it day by day and pray over it.
0.219	We should consider it and ponder over it in reference to our own needs.
0.220	But especially we should read regularly through the Scriptures, consecutively, and not pick out a chapter here and there.
0.221	If we do, we remain spiritual dwarfs.
0.222	I tell you so affectionately.
0.223	For the first four years after my conversion I made no progress, because I neglected the Bible.
0.224	But when I regularly read on through the whole of it with reference to my own heart and soul, I made progress immediately.
0.225	Then my peace and joy continued more and more.
0.226	Now I have been doing this for forty-seven years.
0.227	I have read through the whole Bible about one hundred times, and I always find it fresh when I begin it again.
0.228	So my peace and joy have increased more and more.
0.229	Now think of it, you beloved younger brothers and sisters in particular, and say, Let me live to the glory of God.
0.230	And if you have reached middle age and have neglected to read the Word of God in this way, begin it now with earnestness; and if you read it like this, with prayer and application to your own heart, and seek to practice what you find, your peace and joy will increase more and more, more and more; and it will be said of you, “Your youth is renewed like the eagle’s.”
0.231	How bright, then, are the prospects of eternity when we lay hold of the precious Word!
0.232	May the Lord grant that we may each be able to do so!
0.233	But are there any dear friends here who have not yet obtained forgiveness?
0.234	If there are, let them now pass sentence on themselves, let them now condemn themselves as guilty sinners, and put their whole trust for salvation in the Lord Jesus Christ, through whom alone it is to be obtained.
