0.1	And when you pray, you shall not be like the hypocrites are: for they love to pray standing in the synagogues and on the corners of the streets, that they may be seen by men.
0.2	Truly I say to you, they have their reward.
0.3	But you, when you pray, go into your inner room, and when you have shut your door, pray to your Father who is in secret; and your Father who sees in secret will reward you openly.
0.4	But when you pray, do not use vain repetitions, as the heathen do; for they think that they will be heard for their much speaking.
0.5	Therefore do not be like them, for your Father knows the things you have need of before you ask Him.
0.6	In this manner, therefore, pray: Our Father who is in heaven, hallowed be Your name.
0.7	Your kingdom come. Your will be done on earth, as it is in heaven.
0.8	Give us this day our daily bread.
0.9	And forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors.
0.10	And do not lead us into temptation, but deliver us from evil: For Yours is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory, forever. Amen.
0.11	For if you forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive you: but if you do not forgive men their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your trespasses.—Matthew 6:5–15.
0.12	We will meditate on part of Matthew 6, beginning at verse 5: “When you pray, you shall not be like the hypocrites are, for they love to pray standing in the synagogues and on the corners of the streets, that they may be seen by men.
0.13	Truly, I say to you, they have their reward.”
0.14	With regard to not a few of the Pharisees of old, this was actually the case.
0.15	They would stand praying for a long time in the synagogues; but what was far worse than this, when the ordinary time of prayer came for the Israelites—about three o’clock in the afternoon by our time—they would so arrange it that at that very time they could be found at the corners of the streets, where they might be observed in the act of prayer by as many people as possible coming from different directions.
0.16	All this was hypocrisy.
0.17	In this way they professed to be very holy men, but in reality it was the reverse.
0.18	“Truly, I say to you, they have their reward.”
0.19	Their reward was the applause of their fellow men.
0.20	A poor, miserable recompense.
0.21	“But when you pray, go into your inner room.”
0.22	The great point here is secrecy with regard to prayer.
0.23	Not everyone is in such a position that they have a little room to which they can withdraw and lock the door.
0.24	But if it can be done, it should be done.
0.25	If it is impossible, God will accept us according to our position and circumstances.
0.26	I remember a case which I would like to relate, to show how people may be situated.
0.27	About fifty years ago I went to Germany to find missionaries for the East Indies.
0.28	On this journey I came to Magdeburg, one of the strongest and largest fortresses of the kingdom of Prussia.
0.29	There, in the house of a godly man in the army, I found a comrade of his, and since he lived in barracks, I said, “My dear brother, how do you manage with regard to prayer, since you are constantly surrounded by hundreds of soldiers?”
0.30	His reply was, “When I want to pray in secret, I go down into a large sand cellar, which is completely dark, and there I kneel down on the sand.
0.31	No one is able to see that I am there, though some of my comrades often come close on my heels; but I am never found there.
0.32	I am alone, completely alone; no one sees me; and that is my inner room.” So in whatever different ways the children of God may be situated, they have to do the best they can.
0.33	But the great point is that, as much as possible, we should seek to deal with our heavenly Father in prayer in secret, and under no circumstances aim to be noticed by our fellow men in order to gain their applause.
0.34	“When you pray, go into your inner room, and when you have shut your door” (thus further stating the exceedingly great importance of secrecy).
0.35	“Pray to your Father who is in secret, and your Father who sees in secret will reward you openly.”
0.36	Where there is this—a secret waiting on God—He, in His own time and way, will give the open recompense.
0.37	He will show that He is taking notice; He will show that He has recorded it in the book of remembrance; He will show that it has not escaped His observation.
0.38	“Your Father who sees in secret will reward you openly.”
0.39	The secret waiting on God will be made manifest by blessing.
0.40	As surely as we give ourselves to prayer in this way, God will take notice of us and give blessing that anyone can see.
0.41	“But when you pray, do not use vain repetitions, as the heathen do.”
0.42	That is, sentence after sentence repeating the same request, just as the worshipers of Baal did, and as the heathen nations do to the present time, thinking that the more their words, the more they repeat what they ask for, the more certain it is that they will get it.
0.43	“Do not use vain repetitions as the heathen do, for they think that they will be heard for their much speaking; therefore do not be like them, for your Father knows the things you have need of before you ask Him.”
0.44	Prayer is not necessary for the sake of informing God; but prayer is necessary simply because it is the appointment of God.
0.45	He would have us go to Him for our own good and profit and blessing, asking Him for the things we need, because the blessing given to us in answer to prayer is so much more precious than if the blessing were given without prayer.
0.46	Again and again God allows us to be greatly tried, in order that at last, when the blessing does come and prayer is answered, it may be all the more precious to us.
0.47	“Therefore do not be like them, for your Father knows the things you have need of before you ask Him.”
0.48	Now comes what is commonly called “The Lord’s Prayer.”
0.49	“In this manner, therefore, pray.”
0.50	This shows us that it is not God’s appointment that only these words of the Lord Jesus Christ should be used, nor that we should use them continually.
0.51	But in this spirit, in this manner, we should ask for blessing.
0.52	That is the lesson we have to learn.
0.53	“In this manner pray: ‘Our Father who is in heaven.’”
0.54	The very first word is full of meaning.
0.55	The petitions recorded here are suitable, and only suitable, for the children of God—for they are the prayer of the heavenly family, those who are believers in the Lord Jesus Christ.
0.56	We have to keep this before us: that as long as we are not believers in the Lord Jesus Christ, God is not our Father.
0.57	God is God to us.
0.58	He is our Creator.
0.59	He is our Preserver.
0.60	He is the One who supplies us with everything we can need.
0.61	He lets His sun shine for us; He also lets the rain fall, so that we benefit from it.
0.62	But until we are believers in the Lord Jesus Christ, God is not our Father.
0.63	Now this word “Our” shows that we are part of a family, part of the heavenly family; and so it is that all who put their trust in the Lord Jesus Christ for the salvation of their souls, after having been convinced that they are sinners deserving nothing but punishment—all such as are believers—have in God Almighty a Father.
0.64	“Who is in heaven.”
0.65	His place is everywhere, but it is especially in heaven, not on earth, though His power may be seen everywhere, and the manifestations of His presence may be found throughout the universe.
0.66	“Hallowed be Your Name.”
0.67	That is, may Your Name be honored; may Your Name be glorified.
0.68	And here I remind my beloved Christian friends of the meaning of the word “Name.”
0.69	It does not mean the several letters which form the name “God,” but what we learn in the thirty-fourth chapter of Exodus, when Jehovah proclaimed His Name before Moses.
0.70	It is His character, His attributes, what He is Himself, that are to be glorified.
0.71	Jehovah, the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of all those who believe in Jesus, is to be glorified.
0.72	That is the meaning of “Hallowed be Your Name”; and just in proportion as we enter into what God is, we find out what a lovely, lovely Being He is, how infinitely lovely He is. “Hallowed be Your Name.”
0.73	In other words, “I pray that You may be more and more honored and glorified.”
0.74	Now comes another petition.
0.75	“Your kingdom come.” That is, “Hasten the time, bring it about speedily, when You will be universally honored, when You will be universally glorified, when all the works of the wicked one will be destroyed.”
0.76	This will be after the return of the Lord Jesus Christ.
0.77	See how entirely impossible it is for the ungodly, the unconverted, to ask this petition from the heart.
0.78	The lips of such people may utter it countless times, but the true meaning is nothing short of this: “Let the time speedily come when I, a wicked creature, shall be cast into the bottomless pit.”
0.79	That is just the meaning of the prayer when it is uttered in this way; and of course this plainly shows that the ungodly could ask the petition “Your kingdom come” only in ignorance.
0.80	The words can only properly be used by those who are believers in the Lord Jesus, for they implore Him to return soon, so that God may be universally glorified and honored by everyone on earth.
0.81	That this is the meaning we see immediately from what follows.
0.82	“Your will be done on earth, as it is in heaven.” Since the fall of Adam and Eve, the will of God has not been done on earth.
0.83	It was done in Paradise before the fall of Adam and Eve, but from the moment they ate of the forbidden fruit, and sin was brought onto the earth by the devil, from that moment the will of God was not done fully on earth, as it should be, and as it will be hereafter when the Lord Jesus Christ has returned.
0.84	Let us keep this clearly before us.
0.85	One of the first things that was done after the fall was that the first child of Adam and Eve, Cain, murdered his own brother, Abel.
0.86	There we see the fruit of sin entering into the world, and ever since then the will of God has not been “done on earth, as it is in heaven.”
0.87	There have been those who were godly in spirit, at various times, who have sought in their feeble measure to glorify God, and to walk to the praise and glory and honor of His Name.
0.88	But the great mass of human beings on earth have not been doing the will of God, as the will of God is done in heaven.
0.89	“Give us this day our daily bread.”
0.90	Here the daily bread does not mean simply bread and nothing else; it means the necessities of life in general.
0.91	What we need, we ask God for, and we are allowed to ask God to give it to us.
0.92	Notice particularly that it does not say here, “Give us our daily bread,” but “Give us this day our daily bread.”
0.93	That means we are not warranted to expect a great abundance in the way of supply of earthly things.
0.94	God may be going to fill our hearts with cause for gratitude; God may most abundantly give us the necessities of life beforehand, and a long time beforehand; but if He does not do it, we are not to blame Him, far less to consider that He is not faithful to His promise, for He has not promised that He will give us the necessities of life years beforehand, nor months beforehand, nor weeks beforehand, nor many days beforehand; He has only promised that day by day we shall be supplied, and this also only on the condition that we seek first the kingdom of God and His righteousness.
0.95	In other words, if we walk in the fear of God, making it our business to win souls for Him and to set a good example of godly walk and behavior before our fellow men, we shall then, as surely as we trust in Him, be supplied with the necessities of life.
0.96	For so David said, “I have been young, and now am old, yet I have not seen the righteous forsaken, nor his seed”—that is, his children, his descendants—“begging bread.”
0.97	“Give us this day our daily bread.”
0.98	On this petition we may write clothes, house rent, taxes, supplies for everything our family requires.
0.99	All this is implied in the petition for daily bread.
0.100	And how precious it is to have to go to a loving Father, whose very joy and delight it is to answer the petitions of His children.
0.101	He is not a hard Master, an austere Being, but an infinitely loving Father.
0.102	Oh, that it might increasingly come to every one of the children of God to look at Him as an infinitely loving Being; for when we are brought to this state, we are perfectly satisfied at all times and under all circumstances with His dealings with us.
0.103	Whether they are painful or otherwise, we are satisfied that He does all things well.
0.104	“And forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors.”
0.105	This implies acknowledging that we are sinners.
0.106	It is a matter of exceedingly great importance that we give ourselves to God as we are, not seeking to make out that we are very good people, very excellent people, that we habitually walk in His ways and act according to His mind—for the very reverse is the case, more or less, with every one of us, even the best among us.
0.107	Therefore we should increasingly acknowledge before God that we are sinners, that we have not acted at all times and under all circumstances according to His mind, and have accordingly contracted debts, spiritual debts, because we are transgressors.
0.108	We should acknowledge that we are debtors before God, and ask His forgiveness for Christ’s sake, seeking it in God’s appointed way, through Jesus.
0.109	Not on any account seeking forgiveness by pretending that from now on we will live a better life, that we will make up for our misconduct; that can never be done.
0.110	We can never make up for past transgressions, for moment by moment we are expected to love God with all our heart, with all our strength, with all our might, and to walk in His ways to the praise of His Name.
0.111	Therefore we can never by our own doings make up for past misconduct.
0.112	But through faith in Jesus, if we put our trust in Him for salvation, the righteousness of Christ is imputed to us.
0.113	In other words, the holy work and life of the Lord Jesus is put to our account, as if we had been blameless, as if we had been without sin, as if we had walked all our days as consistently as the precious Jesus did.
0.114	His righteousness is imputed to us, and by that alone is forgiveness to be obtained—by putting our trust in Him, seeing Him hanging on the cross, shedding His blood as the Sin-bearer, who made atonement for our sins, and through whom alone we can obtain reconciliation.
0.115	“As we forgive our debtors.”
0.116	This is to be particularly noticed.
0.117	If anyone has offended us, transgressed against us, behaved improperly toward us, are we ready to forgive?
0.118	Are we habitually forgiving?
0.119	Even if it should happen many times, yet if the person who offends us and behaves improperly toward us makes confession, we are to be ready to forgive; and, supposing this is done, it is stated, “As we forgive our debtors.”
0.120	Here I would particularly mention that we are not warranted to expect answers to our prayers if we are not acting according to this.
0.121	I judge that this is very often a hindrance to obtaining answers to our prayers, because we cultivate an unforgiving spirit; we are not ready to forgive those who have offended us and behaved improperly toward us.
0.122	“Forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors”—that should be true of us.
0.123	“And do not lead us into temptation, but deliver us from evil.”
0.124	Our weakness, our helplessness, our nothingness remain as long as we are in the body, and we shall be liable to temptation and exposed to temptation.
0.125	The Lord Jesus Christ found this.
0.126	It may be in our case, as it was with Him, that the tempter leaves us for a season.
0.127	For a season he may not particularly seek to overpower us, but it will be only for a season; he will come again.
0.128	That, however, is only one side of the truth; and the other side of the truth is this: that God is ready to succor and help His children.
0.129	All through their pilgrimage, if they only acknowledge their weakness and come to Him and seek His assistance, He is ready to help.
0.130	Our prayer, therefore, is to be this: that God, in the riches of His grace, would allow us to be tempted no more than is absolutely needful for the glory of His Name, and for us to become more and more acquainted with His power, with His love, and with His readiness to appear on our behalf.
0.131	Then it is added, “But deliver us from evil.”
0.132	That more especially means the devil himself: “From the evil one, the wicked one, deliver us.”
0.133	For it is he who is the source of evil, and the greatest evil, since it is he who has such craftiness and is continually ready to gain an advantage over us.
0.134	Therefore, above all, our prayer should be this: “Deliver us from the wicked one, the evil one, the devil; do not allow him to gain an advantage over us”; and this prayer is to be uttered from the heart to the very last moment of our earthly pilgrimage.
0.135	We never reach such a state that we are so perfectly holy, so perfectly sinless, so perfectly Christlike, that the devil can never gain an advantage over us.
0.136	Oh, let us seek to enter into this!
0.137	I tell you, my own experience in this very thing is this: I distrust myself more than ever.
0.138	I acknowledge before God more than ever my own weakness and helplessness, and I have continually cried to God to keep me from the craftiness and the deceit of the wicked one; for were I left to myself—aged as I am, and long as I have walked in the ways of God, and in some little degree also in the fear of God, to His honor and glory, in love and holiness—yet with all this, were I left to myself, my life would end just as Asa’s did.
0.139	For thirty years he had greatly glorified God; but in the last two years of his life he deeply dishonored God. So, on account of my own weakness, my prayer continually is, “Lord, grant that I may finish my course with joy, and not to the shame and dishonor of Your holy Name.”
0.140	“For Yours is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory, forever.
0.141	Amen.” These words bring before us “the why” for expecting answers to our prayers.
0.142	The kingdom is the Lord’s; He, therefore, is able to do it.
0.143	He is the Mighty One, the Powerful One.
0.144	“Yours is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory, forever.”
0.145	You, O God, do not change; there is no variation found in You.
0.146	You are able to succor us.
0.147	This is further confirmed by the word “Amen.”
0.148	Yes! So it shall be.
0.149	In this evil world we shall greatly cheer and comfort ourselves by this very statement here: “Yours is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory, forever. Amen.”
0.150	Oh, how precious the prospect that we do not speak into the air, but that we speak to the loving heart of God Almighty, who can do everything and who is willing to do on behalf of His children everything that is for their real blessing in Christ!
0.151	Now, in the next and last two verses, we have what I have already referred to.
0.152	“For if you forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive you; but if you do not forgive men their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your trespasses.”
0.153	Here we see not only that we are not warranted in expecting answers to our prayers if we do not forgive our fellow men when they have offended against us and have done things that are improper, but also that we shall lose the knowledge and the enjoyment that springs from the consciousness of the forgiveness of our own sins.
0.154	It is plainly stated, “If you forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive you; but if you do not forgive men their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your trespasses.”
0.155	And I believe that in this we have the secret of why in our day so many true children of God are found whose life and conduct indicate that they are believers in Christ, but who nevertheless do not enjoy the forgiveness of their sins.
0.156	In the case of not a few, we have reason to believe it comes from there being something in their mind which they seem unable to pass over, regarding offenses they have suffered from others and have not forgiven.
0.157	If this is the case, they cannot wonder why they themselves do not enjoy the knowledge of the forgiveness of their own sins.
0.158	Now this little portion on which we have been meditating says to us afresh, “What an unspeakably blessed thing it is to be a child of God!”
0.159	So I have found it during the past seventy-one years and five months that I have been a believer in the Lord Jesus!
0.160	Oh, I cannot express to any who are not believers in the Lord Jesus Christ what they lose by staying away from Him!
0.161	There are so many who suppose that becoming a Christian is a wretched and miserable thing, that becoming a believer in Christ and giving the heart to the Lord Jesus shuts us out from life, from everything, and from every particle of enjoyment.
0.162	An altogether false notion.
0.163	The very reverse, the very reverse is the case!
0.164	I repeat what I have said more than once: that as a young man under twenty I sought happiness with all my might in the things of this world, and I had the opportunity of finding it, if it could be found in this way at all.
0.165	I was passionately fond of the theater; I was fond of the ballroom; I was found at the card table, at the billiard table, and in all kinds of worldly company, and very frequently at the head of them as a leader; but instead of finding real, true happiness, it was nothing but disappointment that I continually met with.
0.166	At last I thought, “Oh, if only I could travel a great deal, how happy that would make me!”
0.167	God allowed me to taste this.
0.168	I traveled forty-three days in succession, day after day, day after day.
0.169	I saw the most beautiful scenery to be seen under heaven; but after six weeks I became so sick of traveling that I could pass the most beautiful scenery without even looking at it.
0.170	Five weeks after that I found Jesus—I found my heavenly Friend—and the very first evening I was lying peacefully on my bed as a forgiven sinner, at peace with God.
0.171	I blessed and praised Him for it.
0.172	And without anyone having to say to me, “Now it must be out with the theater, it must be out with the card table, it must be out with the ballroom”—without anyone speaking a word to me, for I had not seen a single Christian to converse with—that was a settled matter.
0.173	I was now regenerated, born again, having obtained spiritual life after I had been dead in trespasses and sins for twenty years and five weeks.
0.174	Therefore, I say, without anyone saying a single word to me, it was a settled matter that my whole life must be changed and altered. And so it was; and what has been the result?
0.175	I instantly became a very happy young man, and I have been a happy man in my middle-aged years, and I am a happy man—yes, an exceedingly happy man—greatly advanced in years as I now am. Oh,
0.176	“If all the world my Jesus knew, / All the world would love Him too.”
0.177	But it is because the unconverted think it is a miserable thing to come to Christ that they stay away from Him.
0.178	The truth is this: that only, only, only through faith in the Lord Jesus can real, true happiness be obtained.
0.179	Therefore, any who have told themselves this and stayed away from Christ, let them do so no longer; let them acknowledge that they are sinners deserving nothing but punishment, and put their trust in Jesus alone for the salvation of their souls, and the result will be that they will obtain peace and joy in God, just as I found it when I was brought to Christ.
0.180	May God grant that this may speak to the hearts of those who until now have been going on thoughtlessly and carelessly, unconcerned about the things of heaven.
