0.1	“Blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall be called the children of God.” — Matthew 5:9.
0.2	This is the seventh of the Beatitudes.
0.3	There is a mystery always connected with the number seven.
0.4	It was the number of perfection among the Hebrews, and it seems as if the Savior had placed the peacemaker there, as if he were nearly approaching the perfect man in Christ Jesus.
0.5	He who would have perfect blessedness, so far as it can be enjoyed on earth, must labor to attain this seventh benediction and become a peacemaker.
0.6	There is also a significance in the position of the text, if you consider the context.
0.7	The verse that precedes it speaks of the blessedness of “the pure in heart, for they shall see God.”
0.8	It is good that we should understand this.
0.9	We are to be “first pure, then peaceable.”
0.10	Our peaceableness is never to be a compact with sin, or an alliance with what is evil.
0.11	We must set our faces like flint against everything that is contrary to God and his holiness.
0.12	That being a settled matter in our souls, we can go on to peaceableness toward men.
0.13	No less does the verse that follows my text seem to have been placed there on purpose.
0.14	However peaceable we may be in this world, we shall still be misrepresented and misunderstood; and no wonder, for even the Prince of Peace, by his very peacefulness, brought fire upon the earth.
0.15	He himself, though he loved mankind and did no wrong, was “despised and rejected by men, a man of sorrows and acquainted with grief.”
0.16	Lest, therefore, the peaceable in heart should be surprised when they meet with enemies, it is added in the following verse, “Blessed are they who are persecuted for righteousness’ sake, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.”
0.17	Thus the peacemakers are not only pronounced blessed, but they are surrounded with blessings.
0.18	Lord, give us grace to climb to this seventh beatitude!
0.19	Purify our minds, that we may be “first pure, then peaceable”; and fortify our souls, that our peaceableness may not lead us into surprise and despair when for your sake we are persecuted among men.
0.20	Now let us try to enter into the meaning of our text.
0.21	This is how we would handle it this morning, as God shall help us.
0.22	First, let us describe the peacemaker; second, let us proclaim his blessedness; third, let us set him to work; and then, fourth, let the preacher become a peacemaker himself.
0.23	I. First, LET US DESCRIBE THE PEACEMAKER.
0.24	The peacemaker, while distinguished by his character, has the outward position and condition of other men.
0.25	He stands in all the relations of life just as other men do.
0.26	Thus the peacemaker is a citizen, and though he is a Christian, he remembers that Christianity does not require him to give up his citizenship, but to use and improve it for Christ’s glory.
0.27	The peacemaker, then, as a citizen, loves peace.
0.28	If he lives in this land, he knows that he lives among a people who are very sensitive about their honor and are quickly and easily provoked — a people so pugnacious in character that the very mention of war stirs their blood, and they feel as if they would go at it at once with all their force.
0.29	The peacemaker remembers the war with Russia, and he recalls what fools we were to meddle there, bringing on ourselves great losses both in trade and in money, and no advantage whatever that can be perceived.
0.30	He knows that this nation has often been drawn into war for political purposes, and that the pressure and burden of it usually falls upon the poor working man, upon those who have to earn their living by the sweat of their face.
0.31	Therefore, though he, like other men, feels hot blood, and, being a born Englishman, often feels the blood of the old sea kings in his veins, yet he represses it and says to himself,
0.32	“I must not strive, for the servant of God must be gentle toward all men, able to teach, patient.”
0.33	So he sets his back against the current, and when he hears the noise of war everywhere and sees many who are hot for it, he does his best to give them a cooling drink, and he says, “Be patient; let it alone; even if the thing is an evil, war is worse than any other evil.
0.34	There was never yet a bad peace, and never a good war,” he says, “and whatever loss we may suffer by being too quiet, we shall certainly lose a hundred times as much by being too fierce.”
0.35	And then, in the present case, he thinks how evil it would be for two Christian nations to go to war — two nations sprung from the same blood — two countries that really have a closer relationship than any other two countries on the face of the earth — rivals in their free institutions — co-workers in spreading the gospel of Christ — two nations that have in their midst more of the elect of God and more of the true followers of Christ than any other nations under heaven.
0.36	Yes, he thinks within himself, it would be evil that the bones of our sons and daughters should again go to make manure for our fields, as they have done before.
0.37	He remembers that the farmers of Yorkshire brought home the soil from Waterloo with which to manure their own fields — the blood and bones of their own sons and daughters; and he thinks it not fitting that the prairies of America should be enriched with the blood and bones of his children; and on the other hand he thinks that he would not strike another man, but would sooner be struck by him, and that blood would be an awful sight to him.
0.38	So he says, “What I would not do myself, I would not have others do for me; and if I would not be a killer, neither would I have others killed for me.”
0.39	He walks in vision over a field of battle; he hears the shrieks of the dying and the groans of the wounded; he knows that even conquerors themselves have said that all the enthusiasm of victory has not been able to remove the horror of the dreadful scene after the fight; and so he says, “No — peace, peace!”
0.40	If he has any influence in the commonwealth — if he is a Member of Parliament, if he writes for a newspaper, or if he speaks from the platform — he says, “Let us look well to it before we hurry into this strife.
0.41	We must preserve our country’s honor; we must maintain our right to shelter those who flee from their oppressors; we must maintain that England shall always be the safe home of every rebel who flees from his king, a place from which the oppressed shall never be dragged by force of arms; yet still,” he says, “can this not be done, and yet no blood be shed?”
0.42	And he urges the law officers to look well into it and see whether they cannot find that perhaps an oversight may have been committed, which may be pardoned and condoned without the shedding of blood, without plucking the sword from its scabbard.
0.43	Well, he says of war that it is a monster, that at its best it is a fiend, that of all scourges it is the worst; and he looks upon soldiers as the red twigs of the bloody rod, and he begs God not to strike a guilty nation in this way, but to sheathe the sword for a while, that we may not be cast into trouble, overwhelmed with sorrow, and exposed to cruelty, which may bring thousands to the grave and multitudes to poverty.
0.44	Thus the peacemaker acts; and he feels that while he does so, his conscience justifies him, and he is blessed, and men shall one day acknowledge that he was one of the children of God.
0.45	But the peacemaker is not only a citizen but a man, and if he sometimes leaves general politics alone, yet as a man he thinks that the politics of his own person must always be those of peace.
0.46	There, if his honor is stained, he does not stand up for it: he considers that it would be a greater stain on his honor for him to be angry with his fellow man than for him to bear an insult.
0.47	He hears others say, “If you tread on a worm, it will turn”; but he says, “I am not a worm but a Christian, and therefore I do not turn, except to bless the hand that strikes me, and to pray for those who treat me with spite.”
0.48	He has his temper, for the peacemaker can be angry, and woe to the man who cannot be; he is like Jacob limping on his thigh, for anger is one of the holy feet of the soul when it goes in the right direction; but while he can be angry, he learns to “be angry and yet not sin,” and “he does not allow the sun to go down upon his wrath.”
0.49	When he is at home, the peacemaker seeks to be quiet with his servants and with his household; he puts up with many things sooner than speak one unbecoming word, and if he rebukes, it is always with gentleness, saying, “Why do you do this? — why do you do this?” — not with the severity of a judge, but with the tenderness of a father.
0.50	The peacemaker may learn a lesson, perhaps, from a story that I came across last week while reading the life of Mr. John Wesley.
0.51	Crossing to America in a ship with Mr. Oglethorpe, who was to be the governor of Savannah, he one day heard a great noise in the governor’s cabin.
0.52	So Mr. Wesley went there, and the governor said, “I dare say you want to know what this noise is about, sir. I have good reason for it.
0.53	You know, sir,” he said, “that the only wine I drink is Cyprus wine, and it is necessary for me; I put it on board, and this rascal, my servant, this Grimaldi, has drunk all of it; I will have him beaten on the deck, and the first warship that comes by, he shall be seized by the press gang and enlisted in His Majesty’s service, and a hard time he shall have of it, for I will let him know that I never forgive.”
0.54	“Your honor,” said Mr. Wesley, “then I hope you never sin.”
0.55	The rebuke was so well put, so pointed, and so needed, that the governor replied at once, “Alas, sir, I do sin, and I have sinned in what I have said; for your sake he shall be forgiven; I trust he will not do the like again.”
0.56	So the peacemaker always thinks it best, since he is a sinner himself and responsible to his own Master, not to be too hard a master to his servants, lest while he is provoking them he may also be provoking his God.
0.57	The peacemaker also goes out among people, and when he is in company he sometimes meets with slurs and even with insults, but he learns to bear these, for he remembers that Christ endured much opposition from sinners against himself.
0.58	Holy Cotton Mather, a great Puritan minister of America, had received a number of anonymous letters in which he was greatly abused; having read them and kept them, he wrapped a piece of paper around them, and when he put them on a shelf he wrote on the paper, “Libels — Father, forgive them!”
0.59	So does the peacemaker.
0.60	He says of all these things, “They are libels — Father, forgive them!” and he does not rush to defend himself, knowing that he whom he serves will take care that his good name is preserved, if only he himself is careful how he walks among men.
0.61	He goes into business, and it sometimes happens to the peacemaker that circumstances arise in which he is greatly tempted to go to law; but he never does this unless he is strictly compelled to it, for he knows that legal work is playing with edged tools, and that even those who know how to use the tools still cut their own fingers.
0.62	The peacemaker remembers that the law is most profitable to those who carry it on; he knows, too, that where men will give sixpence to the ministry for the good of their souls, and pay a guinea to their physician for the good of their bodies, they will spend a hundred pounds, or five hundred, as a refresher fee to their counsel in the Court of Chancery.
0.63	So he says, “No, better that I be wronged by my adversary and he gain some advantage, than that both of us should lose our all.”
0.64	So he lets some of these things go by, and he finds that on the whole he is none the loser by sometimes giving up his rights.
0.65	There are times when he is constrained to defend himself; but even then he is ready for every compromise, willing to give way at any time and at any season.
0.66	He has learned the old saying that “an ounce of prevention is better than a pound of cure,” and so he takes heed to agree with his adversary quickly while he is still on the way, leaving strife alone before it is meddled with, or, when it has been meddled with, seeking to end it as quickly as possible, as in the sight of God.
0.67	And then the peacemaker is a neighbor; and though he never seeks to meddle in his neighbor’s disputes — especially if it is a dispute between his neighbor and his wife, for he knows well that if those two disagree, they will both very soon agree to disagree with him if he meddles between them — yet if he is called in when there is a dispute between two neighbors, he never stirs them up to hostility, but says to them, “You are not doing well, my brothers; why do you strive with one another?” And though he does not take the wrong side, but always seeks to do justice, yet he always tempers his justice with mercy, and says to the one who is wronged, “Can you not have the nobility to forgive?”
0.68	And he sometimes puts himself between the two when they are very angry, and takes the blows from both sides, for he knows that Jesus did so, who took the blows from his Father and from us as well, so that by suffering in our place, peace might be made between God and man.
0.69	Thus the peacemaker acts whenever he is called upon to do his good offices, and more especially if his position enables him to do it with authority.
0.70	If he sits on the judgment seat, he endeavors not to bring a case to trial if it can be settled otherwise.
0.71	If he is a minister, and there is a difference among his people, he does not enter into the details, for he knows well that there is much idle gossip; but he says “Peace” to the billows and “Hush” to the winds, and so he bids men live.
0.72	They have so short a time, he thinks, to dwell together, that it is fitting they should live in harmony.
0.73	And so he says, “How good and pleasant a thing it is for brothers to dwell together in unity!”
0.74	But once again, the peacemaker holds as his highest title that he is a Christian.
0.75	Being a Christian, he joins himself to some Christian church; and here, as a peacemaker, he is like an angel of God.
0.76	Even among churches there are those who are bowed down with infirmities, and these infirmities cause Christian men and Christian women to differ at times.
0.77	So the peacemaker says, “This is unseemly, my brother; let us be at peace”; and he remembers what Paul says, “I appeal to Euodias, and I appeal to Syntyche, that they be of the same mind in the Lord”; and he thinks that if these two were thus appealed to by Paul to be of the same mind, unity must be a blessed thing, and he labors for it.
0.78	And sometimes the peacemaker, when he sees differences likely to arise between his denomination and others, turns to the history of Abram, and he reads how the herdsmen of Abram strove with the herdsmen of Lot, and he notes that in the same verse it is said, “And the Canaanite and the Perizzite were living in the land.”
0.79	So he thinks it was a shame that, where there were Perizzites looking on, followers of the true God should disagree.
0.80	He says to Christians, “Do not do this, for we make sport for the devil; we dishonor God; we damage our own cause; we ruin the souls of men”; and he says, “Put your swords back into their scabbards; be at peace, and do not fight one with another.”
0.81	Those who are not peacemakers, when received into a church, will fight over the smallest whim; will differ about the minutest point; and we have known churches torn to pieces, and schisms committed in Christian bodies, over things so foolish that a wise man could not perceive the occasion; things so ridiculous that a reasonable man must have overlooked them.
0.82	The peacemaker says, “Follow after peace with all men.”
0.83	Especially he prays that the Spirit of God, who is the Spirit of peace, may rest upon the church at all times, binding believers together in one, so that, they being one in Christ, the world may know that the Father has sent his Son into the world — his mission having been heralded with an angelic song, “Glory to God in the highest; on earth peace, good will toward men.”
0.84	Now, I trust that in the description I have given of the peacemaker I may have described some of you; but I fear that most of us would have to say, “Well, in many things I come short.”
0.85	However, this much I would add.
0.86	If there are two Christian men present here who are at odds with each other, I would be a peacemaker, and bid them be peacemakers too.
0.87	Two Spartans had quarreled with each other, and the Spartan king, Aris, told them both to meet him in a temple.
0.88	When they were both there, he heard their differences; and he said to the priest, “Lock the doors of the temple; these two shall never go out until they are at one”; and there, within the temple, he said, “It is unfitting to differ.”
0.89	So they settled their differences at once and went away.
0.90	If this was done in an idol temple, much more let it be done in the house of God; and if the heathen Spartan did this, much more let the Christian, the believer in Christ, do it.
0.91	This very day, put away from you all bitterness and all malice, and say to one another, “If in anything you have offended me, it is forgiven; and if in anything I have offended you, I confess my error; let the breach be healed, and as the children of God, let us be in union with one another.”
0.92	Blessed are those who can do this, for “blessed are the peacemakers!”
0.93	II. Having thus described the peacemaker, I shall go on to DECLARE HIS BLESSEDNESS.
0.94	“Blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall be called the children of God.”
0.95	A threefold commendation is implied.
0.96	First, he is blessed; that is, God blesses him, and I know that he whom God blesses is blessed, and he whom God curses is cursed.
0.97	God blesses him from the highest heavens; God blesses him in a godlike manner; God blesses him with the abundant blessings that are treasured up in Christ.
0.98	And while he is blessed by God, the blessedness spreads through his own soul.
0.99	His conscience bears witness that, as in the sight of God, through the Holy Spirit, he has sought to honor Christ among men.
0.100	He is most blessed especially when he has been most assailed with curses; for then the assurance greets him, “In this way they persecuted the prophets who came before you.”
0.101	And whereas he has a command to rejoice at all times, he finds a special command to be exceedingly glad when he is ill-treated.
0.102	Therefore he takes it well if for doing good he is called to suffer, and he rejoices in this way to bear a part of the Savior’s cross.
0.103	He goes to his bed; no dreams of enmity disturb his sleep; he rises and goes to his business, and he fears the face of no man, for he can say, “I have nothing in my heart but friendship toward all”; or if he is attacked with slander, and his enemies have forged a lie against him, he can nevertheless say —
0.104	“He who forged, and he who threw the dart, / Has each a brother’s interest in my heart.”
0.105	Loving all, he is thus peaceful in his own soul, and he is blessed as one who inherits the blessing of the Most High.
0.106	And not infrequently it comes to pass that he is even blessed by the wicked; for though they would withhold a good word from him, they cannot.
0.107	Overcoming evil with good, he heaps coals of fire upon their heads and melts the coldness of their enmity, until even they say, “He is a good man.”
0.108	And when he dies, those whom he has brought to peace with one another say over his tomb, “It would be well if the world could see many like him; there would not be half the strife, nor half the sin, in it if there were many like him.”
0.109	Second, you will observe that the text not only says he is blessed, but adds that he is one of the children of God.
0.110	This he is by adoption and grace; but peacemaking is a sweet evidence of the work of the peaceful Spirit within.
0.111	As the child of God, moreover, he has a likeness to his Father who is in heaven.
0.112	God is peaceful, long-suffering, and tender, full of lovingkindness, pity, and compassion.
0.113	So is this peacemaker.
0.114	Being like God, he bears his Father’s image.
0.115	Thus he testifies to men that he is one of God’s children.
0.116	As one of God’s children, the peacemaker has access to his Father.
0.117	He goes to him with confidence, saying, “Our Father who is in heaven,” which he would not dare to say unless he could plead with a clear conscience, “Forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors.”
0.118	He feels the tie of brotherhood with man, and therefore he feels that he may rejoice in the Fatherhood of God.
0.119	He comes with confidence and with intense delight to his Father who is in heaven, for he is one of the children of the Highest, who does good both to the unthankful and to the evil.
0.120	And still there is a third word of commendation in the text.
0.121	“They shall be called the children of God.”
0.122	They not only are so, but they shall be called so.
0.123	That is, even their enemies shall call them so; even the world shall say, “Ah! that man is a child of God.”
0.124	Perhaps, beloved, there is nothing that so strikes the ungodly as the peaceful behavior of a Christian under insult.
0.125	There was a soldier in India, a big fellow, who before he enlisted had been a prizefighter, and afterward had performed many deeds of valor.
0.126	When he had been converted through the preaching of a missionary, all his messmates made a laughingstock of him.
0.127	They thought it impossible that such a man as he had been should become a peaceful Christian.
0.128	So one day, when they were at mess, one of them wantonly threw a whole basinful of scalding soup into his face and chest.
0.129	The poor man tore his clothes open to wipe away the scalding liquid, and yet, self-possessed amid his agitation, he said, “I am a Christian; I must expect this,” and smiled at them.
0.130	The one who did it said, “If I had thought you would take it that way, I would never have done it; I am very sorry I ever did so.”
0.131	His patience rebuked their malice, and they all said he was a Christian.
0.132	Thus he was called a child of God.
0.133	They saw in him an evidence that was all the more striking to them because they knew that they could not have done the same.
0.134	When Mr. Kilpin of Exeter was walking along the streets one day, a wicked man pushed him from the pavement into the gutter, and as he fell into the gutter the man said, “Lie there, John Bunyan; that is good enough for you.”
0.135	Mr. Kilpin got up and went on his way, and when this man afterward wanted to know how he had taken the insult, he was surprised that all Mr. Kilpin said was that he had done him more honor than dishonor, for he thought that being called John Bunyan was worth being rolled in the gutter a thousand times.
0.136	Then he who had done this said that he was a good man.
0.137	So those who are peacemakers are “called the children of God.”
0.138	They demonstrate it to the world in such a way that the very blind must see and the very deaf must hear that God is truly in them.
0.139	Oh, that we had grace enough to win this blessed commendation!
0.140	If God has brought you far enough, my hearer, to hunger and thirst after righteousness, I pray you never cease your hunger until he has brought you so far as to be a peacemaker, that you may be called a child of God.
0.141	III. But now, in the third place, I am to try to SET THE PEACEMAKER TO WORK.
0.142	You have much work to do, I do not doubt, in your own households and your own circles of acquaintance.
0.143	Go and do it.
0.144	You remember well that text in Job — “Can that which is unsavory be eaten without salt? Or is there any taste in the white of an egg?” — by which Job would have us know that unsavory things must have something else with them, or else they will not be pleasant as food.
0.145	Now, our religion is an unsavory thing to men: we must put salt with it; and this salt must be our quietness and our peacemaking disposition.
0.146	Then those who would have shunned our religion by itself will say of it, when they see the salt with it, “This is good,” and they will find some relish in this “white of an egg.”
0.147	If you would commend your godliness to the sons of men, make clear and clean work in your own houses, purging out the old leaven, that you may offer sacrifice to God of a godly and heavenly kind.
0.148	If you have any strifes among you, or any divisions, I pray you, even as God, for Christ’s sake, forgave you, so do the same yourselves.
0.149	By the bloody sweat of him who prayed for you, and by the agonies of him who died for you and in dying said, “Father, forgive them, since they do not know what they do,” forgive your enemies, “pray for those who treat you with spite, and bless those who curse you.”
0.150	Let it always be said of you, as a Christian, “That man is meek and lowly in heart, and would sooner bear injury himself than cause injury to another.”
0.151	But the chief work I want to set you about is this: Jesus Christ was the greatest of all peacemakers.
0.152	“He is our peace.”
0.153	He came to make peace between Jew and Gentile, “for he has made both one, and has broken down the middle wall of partition between us.”
0.154	He came to make peace between all striving nationalities, for we are “no longer Greek, barbarian, Scythian, slave or free, but Christ is all in all.”
0.155	He came to make peace between his Father’s justice and our offending souls, and he has made peace for us through the blood of his cross.
0.156	Now, you who are the sons of peace, endeavor as instruments in his hands to make peace between God and men.
0.157	For your children’s souls let your earnest prayers go up to heaven.
0.158	For the souls of all your acquaintances and kinsfolk let your supplications never cease.
0.159	Pray for the salvation of your perishing fellow creatures.
0.160	Thus you will be peacemakers.
0.161	And when you have prayed, use all the means within your power.
0.162	Preach, if God has given you the ability; preach with the Holy Spirit sent down from heaven — the reconciling word of life.
0.163	Teach, if you cannot preach.
0.164	Teach the Word. “Be urgent in season and out of season.”
0.165	“Sow beside all waters”; for the gospel “speaks better things than the blood of Abel,” and cries peace to the sons of men.
0.166	Write to your friends about Christ; and if you cannot speak much, speak a little for him.
0.167	But oh, make it the object of your life to win others for Christ!
0.168	Never be satisfied with going to heaven alone.
0.169	Ask the Lord that you may be the spiritual father of many children, and that God may bless you in the ingathering of much of the Redeemer’s harvest.
0.170	I thank God that there are so many among you who are alive to the love of souls.
0.171	It makes my heart glad to hear of conversions and to receive the converts; but I am most glad when many of you, converted through my own instrumentality under God, are made the means of the conversion of others.
0.172	There are brothers and sisters here who constantly bring me those whom they first brought to this house, over whom they watched and prayed, and whom at last they have brought to the minister, that he may hear their confession of faith.
0.173	Blessed are such peacemakers!
0.174	You have “saved a soul from death, and hidden a multitude of sins.”
0.175	“They who turn many to righteousness shall shine as the stars forever and ever.”
0.176	They, indeed, in heaven itself “shall be called the children of God.”
0.177	The genealogy of that book in which the names of all the Lord’s people are written shall record that through God the Holy Spirit they have brought souls into the bond of peace through Jesus Christ.
H:0.20	IV. The minister has now, in the last place, TO PRACTICE HIS OWN TEXT, AND TO ENDEAVOR, THROUGH GOD THE HOLY SPIRIT, TO BE A PEACEMAKER THIS MORNING.
0.178	I speak this morning to many a score of people who know nothing of peace; for “there is no peace,” says my God, “to the wicked.”
0.179	“The wicked is like the troubled sea, which cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire and dirt.”
0.180	I do not speak to you with any desire to make a false peace with your souls.
0.181	Woe to the prophets who say, “Peace, peace,” when there is no peace!
0.182	Rather, let me first of all, that we may make sound work of this matter, expose the peaceless, warring state of your soul.
0.183	O soul! you are at war with your conscience this morning.
0.184	You have tried to quiet it, but it will prick you.
0.185	You have shut up this Recorder of the town of Mansoul in a dark place, and you have built a wall before his door; but still, when his fits are on him, your conscience will thunder at you and say, “This is not right; this is the path that leads to hell; this is the road of destruction.”
0.186	Oh! there are some of you to whom conscience is like a ghost, haunting you by day and night.
0.187	You know the good, though you choose the evil; you prick your fingers with the thorns of conscience when you try to pluck the rose of sin.
0.188	To you the downward path is not an easy one; it is hedged up and ditched up, and there are many bars and gates and chains on the road; but you climb over them, determined to ruin your own souls.
0.189	Oh! there is war between you and conscience.
0.190	Conscience says, “Turn”; but you say, “I will not.”
0.191	Conscience says, “Close your shop on Sunday”; conscience says, “Change this system of trade; it is cheating”; conscience says, “Do not lie to one another, for the Judge is at the door”; conscience says, “Away with that drinking cup; it makes the man into something worse than a brute”; conscience says, “Tear yourself away from that unchaste relationship, have done with that evil, bolt your door against lust”; but you say, “I will drink the sweet though it damn me; I will still go to my cups and to my haunts, though I perish in my sins.”
0.192	There is war between you and your conscience.
0.193	Yet your conscience is God’s deputy in your soul.
0.194	Let conscience speak for a moment or two this morning.
0.195	Do not fear him; he is a good friend to you, and though he speaks roughly, the day will come when you will know that there is more music in the very roarings of conscience than in all the sweet siren tones that lust adopts to lure you to your ruin.
0.196	Let your conscience speak.
0.197	But more, there is war between you and God’s law.
0.198	The Ten Commandments are against you this morning.
0.199	The first one comes forward and says, “Let him be cursed, for he denies me.
0.200	He has another god besides me; his god is his belly; he pays homage to his lust.”
0.201	All the Ten Commandments, like ten great pieces of cannon, are pointed at you today, for you have broken all God’s statutes and lived in daily neglect of all his commands.
0.202	Soul! you will find it a hard thing to go to war with the law.
0.203	When the law came in peace, Sinai was wholly wrapped in smoke, and even Moses said, “I do exceedingly fear and quake.”
0.204	What will you do when the law comes in terror, when the trumpet of the archangel tears you from your grave, when the eyes of God burn their way into your guilty soul, when the great books are opened, and all your sin and shame are published?
0.205	Can you stand against an angry law in that day?
0.206	When the officers of the law come forth to deliver you up to the tormentors and cast you away forever from peace and happiness, sinner, what will you do?
0.207	Can you dwell with everlasting fires?
0.208	Can you endure the eternal burnings?
0.209	O man! “agree quickly with your adversary while you are still on the way with him, lest at any time the adversary deliver you to the judge, and the judge deliver you to the officer, and you be cast into prison.
0.210	Truly I say to you, you shall by no means come out from there until you have paid the very last farthing.”
0.211	But, sinner, do you know that you are at war with God this morning?
0.212	He who made you and was your best friend, you have forgotten and neglected.
0.213	He has fed you, and you have used your strength against him.
0.214	He has clothed you — the clothes you have on your back today are the livery of his goodness — yet, instead of being the servant of him whose livery you wear, you are the slave of his greatest enemy.
0.215	The very breath in your nostrils is the loan of his charity, and yet you use that breath, perhaps, to curse him, or at best, in lewdness or loose talk, to do dishonor to his laws.
0.216	He who made you has become your enemy through your sin, and you are still today hating him and despising his Word.
0.217	You say, “I do not hate him.”
0.218	Soul, then I charge you, “believe in the Lord Jesus Christ.”
0.219	“No,” you say, “I cannot, I will not do that!”
0.220	Then you hate him.
0.221	If you loved him, you would keep this, his great command.
0.222	“His commandment is not heavy”; it is sweet and easy.
0.223	You would believe in his Son if you loved the Father, for “he who loves the Father loves him also who is begotten of him.”
0.224	Are you thus at war with God? Surely this is a sorry plight for you to be in.
0.225	Can you meet him who comes against you with ten thousand? Yes, can you stand against him who is Almighty, who makes heaven shake at his rebuke, and breaks the crooked serpent with a word?
0.226	Do you hope to hide from him?
0.227	“Can any hide in secret places, so that I shall not see him? says the Lord.
0.228	Though you dig into Carmel, yet he will pluck you out from there.
0.229	Though you dive into the caverns of the sea, there he will command the crooked serpent, and it shall bite you.
0.230	If you make your bed in hell, he will find you out.
0.231	If you climb to heaven, he is there.”
0.232	Creation is your prison house, and he can find you when he will.
0.233	Or do you think you can endure his fury?
0.234	Are your ribs iron? Are your bones brass?
0.235	Even if they were, yet they shall melt like wax before the coming of the Lord God of hosts, for he is mighty, and like a lion he shall tear his prey in pieces, and like a fire he shall devour his adversary, “for our God is a consuming fire.”
