0.1	“You, Israel, are my servant, Jacob whom I have chosen, the seed of Abraham my friend.”—Isaiah 41:8.
0.2	“And he was called the Friend of God.”—James 2:23.
0.3	Abraham was called the Friend of God because that is what he was.
0.4	The title simply declares a fact.
0.5	The father of the faithful was, above all men, “the Friend of God,” and the head of that chosen race of believers whom Jesus calls his friends.
0.6	The name is fittingly given.
0.7	We read that “whatever Adam called every living creature, that was the name of it”; and much more may we be sure that whatever name the Spirit of God has given to any man, that is his proper and rightful name.
0.8	James says not only that this was Abraham’s name, but that he was called by it.
0.9	The name does not occur in his life as told in the Book of Genesis, and it has been questioned whether it occurs anywhere else in Holy Scripture; for many have preferred to translate the word in Isaiah, and in 2 Chronicles 20,
0.10	verse 7, as “lover,” or “beloved,” rather than “friend.”
0.11	However that may be, it is quite certain that among the Jewish people Abraham was frequently spoken of as “the Friend of God.”
0.12	At this present time, among the Arabs and other Muslims, the name of Abraham is not often mentioned, but they speak of him as Khalil Allah, or the “Friend of God,” or more briefly as El Khalil, “the Friend.”
0.13	Those tribes that boast of their descent from him through Ishmael, or through the sons of Keturah, greatly revere the patriarch, and are accustomed to speak of him by the name which the Holy Spirit here gives him.
0.14	It is a noble title, not to be equaled by all the titles of greatness that princes have bestowed, even if they should all meet in one person.
0.15	Patents of nobility are mere vanity when laid side by side with this surpassing honor.
0.16	I think I hear you say, “Yes, it was indeed a high rank that Abraham reached: so high that we cannot attain to it.
0.17	It would be useless for us to dream of being counted friends of God.”
0.18	My brothers, I beg you, do not think so.
0.19	We also may be called friends of God; and the aim of this morning’s message will be to stir up in you the desire to know this matchless friendship.
0.20	Let me read to you the words of our blessed Lord in the fifteenth chapter of John: “You are my friends, if you do whatever I command you.
0.21	From now on I do not call you servants; for the servant does not know what his lord is doing: but I have called you friends; for all things that I have heard from my Father I have made known to you.”
0.22	It is, then, within reach: Jesus himself invites us to live and act, and be his friends.
0.23	Surely none of us will neglect any gracious attainment that lies within the realm of the possible.
0.24	None of us will be content with a scanty measure of grace when we may have life more abundantly.
0.25	I trust you are not so foolish as to say, “If I can only get to heaven by the skin of my teeth, I shall not care what I am on the road.”
0.26	That would be wicked talk; and if you speak this way, I am afraid you will never get to heaven at all.
0.27	He who is being prepared for glory is always hungry for the largest measure of grace.
0.28	He who is born of God desires his Father’s love while he is still a child, and has no thought of waiting for it until he comes of age and enters upon his inheritance.
0.29	Let me have as much of heaven, even now, as I can have.
0.30	Yes, let me now be the friend of God.
0.31	The other day a boatful of people landed on the shores of France, soaked with rain and salt water; they had lost all their luggage and had nothing but what they stood up in: they were glad indeed to have been saved from a wreck.
0.32	It was good that they landed at all; but when it is my lot to cross to France again, I trust I shall set foot on shore in a better state than that.
0.33	I would prefer to cross the Channel in comfort and land with pleasure.
0.34	There is all this difference between being “saved as through fire,” and having “an abundant entrance granted to us” into the kingdom.
0.35	Let us enjoy heaven on the road to heaven.
0.36	Why not? Instead of being fished up as castaways, stranded on the shores of mercy, let us book our passage on board the well-appointed Liner of Free Grace; let us, if possible, travel first class, enjoying all the comforts of the voyage, and having fellowship with the great Captain of our Salvation.
0.37	Why should we think it enough to be mere stowaways?
0.38	I would stir you up, dear friends, at this time to aspire to the best gifts.
0.39	Grow in grace. Increase in love to God, and in nearness of access to him, that the Lord may in this good hour stoop down to us as our great Friend, and then lift us up to be known as his friends.
0.40	I have many things to say to you this morning, and therefore I must speak on each one very briefly: I am half afraid that I may be driven to a brevity that will make me a little obscure.
0.41	I ask you first to notice the title to be wondered at: “Friend of God.”
0.42	When we have meditated and marveled, I shall then speak to you under a second head—the title vindicated—it was a fit and proper title for Abraham, and we can see that it was.
0.43	Third, I shall speak of the title sought after.
0.44	May we all win it and wear it!
0.45	After all this, I shall conclude with a few words on the title used for practical purposes.
0.46	May the Holy Spirit graciously help me in this hour!
H:0.6	I. First, may we be divinely instructed while we look at the name “Friend of God,” and regard it as A TITLE TO BE WONDERED AT.
0.47	Admire and adore the condescending God who speaks this way of a man like ourselves, and calls him his friend.
0.48	The heavens are not pure in his heart, and he charged his angels with folly, and yet he takes a man and sets him apart to be his friend.
0.49	What is man, O Lord, that you are mindful of him? or the Son of Man, that you visit him?
0.50	Who among our sinful race can be worthy of the friendship of Jehovah?
0.51	Only his grace can make it possible for any man to walk with God in high companionship.
0.52	In this case the majestic Friend displays his pure love, since he has nothing to gain.
0.53	Surely God does not need friends.
0.54	You and I need friendship: we cannot always lead a self-contained and solitary life; we are refreshed by the companionship, sympathy, and advice of a like-minded comrade.
0.55	We are very foolish if we entrust ourselves to a host of acquaintances; but we are wise if we have found a faithful friend and know how to make use of him.
0.56	Friendship is one of the sweetest joys of life: many spirits might have failed beneath the bitterness of trial if they had not found a friend.
0.57	No such need can be supposed in the all-sufficient God.
0.58	We know how sweet it is to mingle the current of our life with that of some choice and intimate friend.
0.59	Can God have a friend?
0.60	Can he also find it in his heart to open himself to another?
0.61	Can the secret of Jehovah be with a frail creature?
0.62	Does the Holy One desire to commune outside of himself?
0.63	It cannot be that he is lonely: he is within himself a whole, not only of unity but of tri-personality—Father, Son, and Holy Spirit—and in this there is fellowship enough.
0.64	Yet, look, in infinite condescension the Lord stoops to seek the acquaintance of his own creature, the love of a man, the friendship of Abraham.
0.65	I dare not go as far in speech as my thoughts would lead me: it is certainly a great marvel that the Creator of the heavens and the earth should look to Ur of the Chaldeans for a man, and should separate him to himself, and teach and train him until he made him his friend—an honor which even the cherubim and seraphim have never reached.
0.66	Friendship cannot be all on one side.
0.67	In this particular case it is intended that we should know that while God was Abraham’s friend, this was not all; Abraham was also God’s friend.
0.68	He received and returned the friendship of God.
0.69	From one point of view Abraham was always the object of God’s pity and mercy; but by his grace the Lord also lifted him into another condition, in which he became the object of the Lord’s good pleasure and delight.
0.70	God gave Abraham his heart, and Abraham gave God his heart.
0.71	They were knit together in love.
0.72	To use expressive words of Scripture, the soul of Abraham was bound up in the bundle of life with the Lord his God.
0.73	Not only did the Lord speak to Abraham as he did to Moses, “face to face, as a man speaks to his friend,” but he continually treated him as his friend, and communed with him as such.
0.74	“Stupendous grace of the Most High! / What has the Lord on worms bestowed, / Called to the council of the sky, / And numbered with the friends of God!”
0.75	Friendship creates a measure of equality between the persons concerned.
0.76	I do not say that absolute equality is at all necessary to friendship, for a great king may have a firm friend in one of the least of his subjects; but the tendency is toward an equalizing of the two friends: the one comes down gladly, and the other rises up in sympathy.
0.77	Friendship produces fellowship, and this bridges the dividing gulf.
0.78	There can be no idea of equality between God the Lord and man the servant; indeed, it is only as we see our true relation as servants that we can be friends.
0.79	Did not Jesus say, “You are my friends, if you do whatever I command you”?
0.80	We must keep our place, or we shall not be friends.
0.81	Yet see how the Lord comes down to Abraham and communes with him at his table; while he lifts Abraham up to his own level, so that he sees the things of God, yes, even sees with gladness the day of our Lord Jesus Christ.
0.82	When we say of two men that they are friends, we put them down in the same list; but what condescension on the Lord’s part to be on terms of friendship with a man!
0.83	Again I say, no nobility compares with this.
0.84	Parmenio was a great general, but all his fame in that respect is forgotten in the fact that he was known as the friend of Alexander.
0.85	He had a great love for Alexander as a man, whereas others cared for him only as a conqueror and a monarch; and Alexander, seeing this, placed great reliance on Parmenio.
0.86	Abraham loved God for God’s sake and followed him fully, and so the Lord made him his confidant, and found pleasure in revealing himself to him and in entrusting to him his sacred oracles.
0.87	O Lord, how excellent is your lovingkindness, that you should make a man your friend!
0.88	I want you also to note the remarkable excellence of Abraham.
0.89	How could he have been God’s friend had not grace worked wonderfully in him?
0.90	A man is known by his friends: you cannot help judging a person by his companions.
0.91	Was it not a great venture for God to call any man his friend? For we are led to judge the character of God by the character of the man whom he chooses to be his friend.
0.92	Yes; and though he was a man of like passions with us, and subject to weaknesses which the Holy Spirit has not hesitated to record, yet Abraham was a remarkably admirable character.
0.93	The Spirit of God produced in him a deep sincerity, a firm principle, and a noble bearing.
0.94	Although a plain man, living in tents, the Father of the Faithful is always a truly royal figure.
0.95	A calm dignity surrounds him, and the sons of Heth and the kings of Egypt feel its power.
0.96	His character is well balanced.
0.97	He is what is commonly called an all-round man.
0.98	He walks before God and is perfect in his generation, so that God is not ashamed to be called his God.
0.99	I might almost say of Abraham’s general life that, like the Lord, he was light, and in him was no darkness at all; of course I only use the expression in the sense intended by our Savior when he spoke of the whole body being full of light, “having no part dark.”
0.100	(Luke 11:36.) Father Abraham is a man fit to be the head of the believing family.
0.101	His quiet son Isaac is like a valley, above which his father rises like an Alp in the greater strength of his character.
0.102	He is equally superior to his notable grandson Jacob, great personality though Jacob is.
0.103	There is a fuss and worry and worldly cunning about Jacob that somewhat clouds his undoubtedly great faith; but this you do not see in Abraham: he moves majestically along his course, shining like the sun in mid-heaven, before whom even clouds are made into chariots of glory.
0.104	I do not say that Abraham was worthy to be called the Friend of God in the sense of merit; but I do say that the grace of God had made him fit to be a partaker of fellowship with the God of light.
0.105	While he was justified by his faith, the Lord’s calling him just was also justified by his works.
0.106	James asks, “Was not Abraham our father justified by works when he had offered Isaac his son upon the altar?”
0.107	Indeed he was; by this great deed of obedience he was proved to be in a right state before God.
0.108	His justification was justified.
0.109	God was just, even in a legal sense, in declaring such a man to be righteous; for righteous he evidently was.
0.110	Oh, that the sanctifying Spirit may prove in us the truth of our faith by the holiness of our works!
0.111	Follow me while I note some of the points in which this divine friendship showed itself.
0.112	The Lord often visited Abraham.
0.113	Friends are sure to visit one another.
0.114	We read, “The word of the Lord came to Abram in a vision”; “The Lord appeared to Abram”; and again, “The Lord appeared to him in the plains of Mamre: and he was sitting in the tent door in the heat of the day.”
0.115	Three mysterious persons came to Abraham, and he entertained them in his tent under the tree, and provided a banquet for them, and waited at the table himself.
0.116	Was he not honored above all men to entertain God himself?
0.117	The Lord sojourned with the patriarch as in a foreign land, and heard the prayers and praises of his servant day by day.
0.118	On the other hand, Abraham was quick to build an altar to the Lord; and besides this he had his chosen spot for private communion with God; for we read, “Abraham got up early in the morning and went to the place where he stood before the Lord.”
0.119	Often did the great Lord and his trusting servant draw near to each other.
0.120	As a result of these visits of friendship paid to Abraham, secrets were disclosed.
0.121	The Lord told Abraham of his purpose concerning the Canaanites, who were ultimately to be destroyed; but their iniquity was not yet full.
0.122	He revealed to him the birth of Isaac, and his intention that the covenant blessing should run in the line of the child born according to promise; and when he had determined to destroy Sodom and Gomorrah, the Lord said to himself, “Shall I hide from Abraham the thing that I do?”
0.123	I suppose it is only a gloss; but Philo quotes this text as from the Septuagint, and puts it this way: “Shall I hide this thing from Abraham my Friend?”
0.124	The present copies of the Septuagint say, “Abraham my servant,” but the other reading is a very natural one.
0.125	It was a special proof of divine friendship that the Lord would not carry out judgment until he had heard what the patriarch might say about it.
0.126	Abraham, for his part, had no secrets, but laid bare his heart to the inspection of his Divine Friend.
0.127	Visits were received, and secrets were made known, and so friendship grew.
0.128	More than that, compacts were entered into.
0.129	On certain grand occasions we read, “The Lord made a covenant with Abram.”
0.130	Once, with solemn sacrifice, a light passed between the divided pieces of the victims.
0.131	At another time it is written that God swore by himself, saying, “Surely, in blessing I will bless you, and in multiplying I will multiply you.”
0.132	The two friends clasped hands and pledged their word.
0.133	Here was a faithful God and faithful Abraham bound in an immovable covenant.
0.134	God trusted Abraham, for he said, “I know him, that he will command his children and his household after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord.”
0.135	And Abraham knew his God and trusted him without suspicion; and so there was firm friendship between them.
0.136	This friendship resulted in the bestowal of countless benefits.
0.137	The life of Abraham was rich with mercies.
0.138	We read, “And Abraham was old, far on in years, and the Lord had blessed Abraham in everything.”
0.139	Friends bless their friends, or at least wish they could.
0.140	Abraham’s Almighty Friend withheld from him no good thing.
0.141	Abraham was rich, but his riches were blessed: we may say of him, “The gold of that land was good.”
0.142	He was remarkably favored in everything to which he set his hand.
0.143	Jacob, comparing himself with his grandfather, said, “Few and evil are the days of your servant”; and his life was certainly lived out on a far lower level than that of the first of the three great fathers of the chosen seed.
0.144	The Lord is a friend who can never know a limit in blessing his friends.
0.145	Having loved his own, he loves them to the end.
0.146	To Abraham, through the grace of his Divine Friend, difficulties were blessings, trials were blessings, and the sharpest test of all was the most ennobling blessing.
0.147	Since Abraham was God’s friend, God accepted his pleadings and was moved by his influence.
0.148	Friends always have an ear for friends.
0.149	When Abraham pleaded with God for Sodom, the Lord patiently listened to his repeated pleadings.
0.150	How instructive is that story of the patriarch’s pleading for Sodom!
0.151	How humbly he speaks!—“I have ventured to speak to the Lord, even I, who am nothing but dust and ashes.”
0.152	Yet how boldly he pleads! For he dares to say, “Shall not the Judge of all the earth do right?”
0.153	The tone of his pleading is worthy of special note.
0.154	It was not an intercession for Sodom so much as a reasoning with God—friend with friend.
0.155	If we were pleading for London we would naturally appeal to God’s mercy; but Abraham takes the bolder course of pleading the divine justice.
0.156	In fact, his plea is not only for Sodom but for God himself: “May it be far from you to act like this, to put the righteous to death with the wicked, and that the righteous should be treated like the wicked; may that be far from you.”
0.157	It is as if he were more eager to keep the name of God from being dishonored by what might look like an injustice than he was even for the saving of the guilty people.
0.158	This was a bold stroke.
0.159	He pleaded more as a friend of God than as a friend of Sodom, and the Lord fully recognized the force of his friendly appeal.
0.160	Lot was rescued, and Zoar was spared, in answer to that prayer; just as Ishmael had been endowed with earthly blessings in response to the plea, “If only Ishmael might live before you!” and just as the household of Abimelech had been healed in answer to Abraham’s supplication.
0.161	There was also between these friends a mutual love and delight.
0.162	Abraham rejoiced in Jehovah!
0.163	He was his shield and his very great reward, and the Lord himself delighted to commune with Abraham.
0.164	The serenity of the patriarch’s life was caused by his constant joy in God.
0.165	I cannot now enter into this choice subject for lack of time.
0.166	Observe, however, that this friendship was maintained with great constancy.
0.167	The Lord never forsook Abraham: even when the patriarch went astray, the Lord remembered and rescued him.
0.168	He did not cast him off in old age.
0.169	Until he was laid in the Cave of Machpelah, God was his God—yes, and he is his God to this day; for did he not proclaim himself to Moses as the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob?
0.170	Abraham lives, and God is still his God.
0.171	Constancy is also seen on the human side of this renowned friendship: Abraham did not turn aside to worship any false god, nor did the Lord turn away from the man of his choice.
0.172	More than that, the Lord kept his friendship with Abraham by favoring his descendants.
0.173	That is what our first text tells us.
0.174	The Lord called Israel, even rebellious Israel, “The seed of Abraham my friend.”
0.175	You know how David sought out the descendants of Jonathan and did them good for Jonathan’s sake; in the same way the Lord loves believers who are the seed of believing Abraham; and he still seeks out the children of Abraham his friend to do them good.
0.176	In the latter days he will save literal Israel: the natural branches of the olive tree, which for a while have been broken off, shall be grafted in again.
0.177	God has not forgotten his friendship with their father Abraham, and therefore he will return in love to Abraham’s seed and be their God again.
0.178	So I have glanced at enough facts to cause this title of “The Friend of God” to be wondered at.
0.179	You have all admired the friendship of Damon and Pythias; see here a greater marvel—the friendship of the Lord God with Abraham, a friendship in which Abraham gave more than his own life as proof of his fidelity, and the Great God still surpassed him in faithfulness.
0.180	II. And now let us notice THE TITLE VINDICATED.
0.181	Abraham was the Friend of God in a true sense.
0.182	There was great fitness and fullness of meaning in the name as applied to him.
0.183	First, Abraham’s trust in God was implicit.
0.184	To show what I mean, I will bring before you the patriarch Job.
0.185	Now Job was a grand believer: in some respects he has “attained to the first three”; but still Job had a controversy with God, and found it hard to think that the Lord dealt justly with him.
0.186	He was able, despite all questions, to say, “Though he slay me, yet I will trust in him”; but he was greatly tossed about and tumbled up and down in his soul, and those three friends of his suggested no end of doubts.
0.187	Their philosophy troubled him; and Job was not as fully established in the doctrine of divine sovereignty as he might have been.
0.188	Abraham had no such controversy: “he did not stagger.”
0.189	David, too, was sometimes plagued with unbelief, so that he almost came to the conclusions of an unbeliever.
0.190	He was perplexed to know how the wicked prospered while he himself was chastened every morning.
0.191	He went down into the mists of the valley; but Abraham habitually walked the hilltops.
0.192	Bathing his forehead in the sunlight of Jehovah’s love, he lived beyond all questions and mistrust.
0.193	O happy man, to know no skepticism, but heroically to believe!
0.194	There is a blessed ignorance that my soul longs for.
0.195	To know is not always gain.
0.196	Fool that I am, I have too often eaten the fruit of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil.
0.197	I wish I could forget everything that has ever been told me which suggests a doubt of my great Lord and his faithful word.
0.198	I will forget, if I can, all the thoughts of man, for they are vain: I am determined to know nothing among you but Jesus Christ, and him crucified.
0.199	Abraham possessed that higher knowledge which treads unbelief underfoot as unworthy even to be argued down.
0.200	He was a perfect child toward God, and therefore a complete man.
0.201	Unless you are converted and become like little children, you shall in no way enter into friendship with God; for this is God’s chief requirement in his friends: that they entertain no doubts of him, but believe him without question.
0.202	Abraham “did not stagger at the promise through unbelief,” for he knew that the Lord was able also to do what he had promised.
0.203	Next, joined to this implicit trust was a practical confidence in the accomplishment of everything that God had promised.
0.204	He went childless for many a day, and the temptation came to him, and for a moment prevailed with him, that he must use human means to bring about the divine promise; but even then he did not doubt that the promise would be carried out.
0.205	His great mistake showed plainly that he believed the promise would be fulfilled: the fault lay in his interfering with the divine method of fulfillment.
0.206	When he was commanded to slay his son he never doubted that God would keep his promise: he reasoned that God was able to raise Isaac up from the dead, from which he also received him back in a figure.
0.207	Faith is to credit contradictions and to believe impossibilities when Jehovah’s word is to the fore.
0.208	If you and I can do this, then we can enter into friendship with God, but not otherwise; for distrust is the death of friendship.
0.209	If the Lord brings a man near to himself, it is absolutely necessary that, at the very least, there should be perfect confidence on the man’s part.
0.210	“Whoever comes to God must believe that he is, and that he is the rewarder of those who diligently seek him.”
0.211	If you think God can lie, you cannot be his friend: you are separating your interest from the Lord’s interest, and committing a breach of friendship, when you distrust.
0.212	Between man and man confidence may be carried too far, but toward God you may carry it to the utmost and know no hesitation.
0.213	Believe without limit, and then you shall enjoy fellowship with the Lord.
0.214	Next to this, Abraham’s obedience to God was unquestioning.
0.215	Whatever God told him to do, he did it promptly and thoroughly.
0.216	When the Lord said to him, “Go out from your country, and from your kindred, and from your father’s house, to a land that I will show you,” he set out, not knowing where he was bound.
0.217	And when the Lord told him to go to the unknown mountain and offer up his son as a burnt offering, he rose early in the morning, and through three days of bitter toil he journeyed to the place where his faith must be tested.
0.218	When both moral and parental instincts might have held him back, he went onward, feeling that it was not his place to question once the command was clear.
0.219	Jehovah’s will was law to him.
0.220	Not everyone has learned even yet that it is God who is the author of all law, and that it is his will which makes a certain course right, and its opposite wrong.
0.221	He was God’s servant and yet his friend; therefore he obeyed as seeing him who is invisible, and trusting him whom he could not understand.
0.222	Abraham’s desire for God’s glory was uppermost at all times.
0.223	He did not do what others would have done, because he feared the Lord.
0.224	I think that Abraham shows himself grandly when he had pursued the kings who had plundered the cities of the plain.
0.225	He overcame them and recovered all their spoils.
0.226	When Melchizedek met him as the priest of the Most High God, Abraham at once gave him tithes of all; but when the king of Sodom proposed that Abraham should keep all the salvage he had taken, and only give back to him the persons who had been captured, it was grand of Abraham not to touch a particle of the prey, but to say, “I will not take anything, from a thread even to a shoelace; I will take nothing that belongs to you, so that you may never say, ‘I have made Abram rich.’”
0.227	He did not want some petty princeling, or indeed anybody, to boast of enriching Abraham: he trusted solely in his God; and though he had a perfect right to take the spoils of war, which were his by capture, yet he would not touch them lest the name of his God should be in the least dishonored.
0.228	Abraham’s communion with God was constant.
0.229	O happy man, who dwelt on high while men were groveling at his feet!
0.230	What bliss he knew in those morning communings with God!
0.231	What peace he felt all day long in the tent and on the plain, since he walked before the Lord and was perfect toward him!
0.232	Whether with the Bedouin or with his own servants, you see the man of God rather than the sheikh, and the friend of God rather than the prince.
0.233	Oh, that you and I may be cleansed to such a pure, holy, and noble life that we too may rightly be called the Friends of God!
0.234	III. Third, dear friends, you will bear with me while I stir you up to regard this name as THE TITLE TO BE SOUGHT AFTER.
0.235	Oh, that we may obtain for ourselves this good degree, this diploma, as “Friend of God”!
0.236	Do you wish to be a friend of God?
0.237	Well, then, first you must be fully reconciled to him.
0.238	Of course you cannot remain his enemy and be his friend—that is clear enough.
0.239	If you are pardoned through the sacrifice of Jesus; if you are justified by his righteousness; if you are regenerated by his Spirit, you are no longer God’s enemy; yet that will not entitle you to be called the friend of God.
0.240	It will entitle you to call God your friend and your helper; but you must go further than that if you would be his friend.
0.241	Love must be created in your heart; gratitude must produce attachment, and attachment must bring about delight.
0.242	You must rejoice in the Lord and maintain close communion with him.
0.243	To be friends, we must exercise a mutual choice: the God who has chosen you must be chosen by you.
0.244	Most deliberately, heartily, resolutely, and undividedly, you must choose God to be your God and your friend.
0.245	Beloved, there can be no friendship between you and God without your own full consent, nor without your ardent desire.
0.246	What do you say to this?
0.247	If sin is pardoned, all ground of hostility is gone; but now grace must come in to reign through righteousness to eternal life, and bring you into a condition of tender love and fervent desire toward the Lord our God.
0.248	But you have not gone far enough yet.
0.249	If we are to be the friends of God, there must be a conformity of heart, and will, and purpose, and character to God.
0.250	Can two walk together if they are not agreed?
0.251	Will God accept as his friend one who despises holiness, who is careless in obedience, who has no interest in the purposes of divine love, no delight in the gospel of Christ?
0.252	Beloved, the Holy Spirit must make us like God, or else we cannot be friends of God.
0.253	We must love Jesus the Son, or we cannot love the Father.
0.254	We cannot rise to the standard of friends of God if self is our ruling force; God is not selfish, and he is not the friend of the selfish.
0.255	Unless we love what God loves and hate what God hates, we cannot be his friends.
0.256	Our lives must, on the whole, run in parallel lines with the life of the gracious, holy, and loving God, or else we shall be walking contrary to him, and he will walk contrary to us.
0.257	If we have come as far as that, then the next thing will surely follow—there must be continual communion.
0.258	The friend of God must not spend a day without God, and he must undertake no work apart from his God.
0.259	Oh, to live with God, and in God, and for God, and like God!
0.260	You cannot be a friend of God if your communion with him is occasional, fitful, distant, broken.
0.261	If you only think of him on the Sabbath or at the sacraments, you cannot be his friend.
0.262	Friends love each other’s company: the friend of God must abide in God and walk with God; and then he shall dwell at ease.
0.263	What do you say to this?
0.264	Has the grace of God made your feet like the feet of a deer, to stand on such high places?
0.265	He can do it.
0.266	Let us seek after the blessing.
0.267	Brothers, if we are to be the friends of God, we must be partners with him.
0.268	He gives over to us all that he has; and friendship with God will require that we give to him all that we have.
0.269	It has been well said that if God is ours we cannot be poor, because God has all, and we have all in having God.
0.270	On the other hand, the cause of God should not be poor if we can make it rich, and his work should never be in want if we can find supplies.
0.271	If we are indeed the Lord’s friends, we count his cause our cause and his work our work, and we throw all that we have into a Joint Stock Bank with the Great All-in-all.
0.272	Friendship, if it exists, will produce mutual delight.
0.273	I cannot explain to you the joy that God has in his people—we shall know that by and by; but he calls his church his Hephzibah, and he says, “My delight is in her.”
0.274	I believe our Lord takes infinite delight in a soul that he has created anew and fashioned after his own likeness.
0.275	He was glad to see man at the first, and yet afterward he regretted that he had made man; but the Lord is always glad to see the newly created man, and he never regrets that he has made him upon the face of the earth.
0.276	The Lord delights in those who fear him.
0.277	I am sure that if we are God’s friends, our greatest joy is to draw near to God, even to God our exceeding joy.
0.278	I have sometimes wished that I had nothing else to do but to dwell with God in prayer, praise, and preaching.
0.279	If it were not for the thousand worries and cares that come to me in connection with the lesser matters arising out of the weaknesses of his church and people, what a happy life mine would be!
0.280	Indeed, I do not complain; I only mean that holy service in constant fellowship with God is heaven below.
0.281	Alas! One has to come down from the Mount of Transfiguration and meet the afflicted child and the quarrelsome scribes at the bottom of the hill.
0.282	Our delight is in God.
0.283	“Yes, my own God is he.”
0.284	He is my all in all.
0.285	Whatever comes from him is perfumed with myrrh and aloes and cassia.
0.286	Even his very threats ring like music in the ears of those who love him.
0.287	There is nothing he does but we will take delight in it.
0.288	We come at length to love even the rod which he wields.
0.289	The blows of such a faithful friend are infinitely better than the kisses of our deceitful enemy.
0.290	The cross which Jesus lays upon us is a light burden, because we delight in him.
0.291	The God of love has our love, and he has become the light of our delight.
0.292	He rejoices over us with singing, and we rejoice before him with the voice of melody.
0.293	But, brothers and sisters, I do not mean to go any further, for we must not tell the secrets of love in the open streets.
0.294	I see a curtain; a veil shrouding the holy of holies.
0.295	I dare not lift that veil.
0.296	Ordinary worshipers cannot come into the most holy place; nor can they look into it until the Lord anoints their eyes and purifies their spirits.
0.297	O Lord, reveal yourself to the half-opened eyes of your people.
0.298	Within that curtain there are choice manifestations, and secret witnesses, and raptures of supreme delight of which I must not speak, because I feel toward these things as Paul felt about what he saw and heard in Paradise: he said it would be unlawful for a man to utter them.
0.299	Beloved, may you know these special joys by personal experience, even as he did who is called “Friend of God”!
