0.248	But once again: what a trial of love that was, when Christ began to suffer for us!
0.249	There are many men, I do not doubt, who are true believers and love their Savior, who would tremble to come to the test of suffering.
0.250	Imagine yourself, my brother, taken today into some dark dungeon of the Inquisition; picture all the horrors of the Dark Ages revived: you are taken down a long, dark staircase and hurried off you do not know where, until at last you come to a place far down in the bowels of the earth, and all around you, hanging on the walls, you see the pincers, the instruments of torture of every kind and shape.
0.251	Two inquisitors there say to you, “Are you prepared to renounce your heretical faith and return to the bosom of the church?”
0.252	I believe, my brothers and sisters, that you would have strength of mind and grace enough to say, “I am not prepared to deny my Savior.”
0.253	But when the pincers began to tear the flesh, when the hot coals began to scorch, when the rack began to dislocate the bones, when all the instruments of torture were wreaking their hellish vengeance—unless the supernatural hand of God were mightily upon you, I am sure that in your weakness you would deny your Master, and in the hour of your peril would forsake the Lord who bought you.
0.254	True, the love of Christ in the heart, when sustained by his grace, is strong enough to carry us through; but I am afraid that with many of us present here, if we had no more love than we have now, we would come out of the Inquisition as miserable apostates from the faith.
0.255	But now, remember Christ.
0.256	He was exposed to tortures that were really far more tremendous.
0.257	There is no engine of Roman Catholic cruelty that can equal that dreadful torture which forced a sweat of blood from every pore.
0.258	Christ was scourged and he was crucified; but there were other woes, unseen by us, which were the soul of his agonies.
0.259	Now, if Christ in the hour of severe trial had said, “I disown my disciples; I will not die,” he might have come down from the cross; and who could accuse him of wrong?
0.260	He owed us nothing; we could do nothing for him.
0.261	Poor worms would be all that he would disown.
0.262	But our Master, even when the bloody sweat covered him like a mantle of gore, never thought of disowning us—NEVER.
0.263	“My Father,” he once said, “if it is possible, let this cup pass from me.”
0.264	But there was always the “If it is possible.”
0.265	If it is possible to save without it, let the cup pass; but if not, your will be done.
0.266	You never hear him say one word in Pilate’s hall that would let you imagine that he was sorry he had undertaken so costly a sacrifice for us; and when his hands are pierced, and when he is parched with fever, and his tongue is dried up like a potsherd, and his whole body is dissolved into the dust of death, you never hear a groan or a shriek that looks like turning back.
0.267	It is the cry of one determined to go on, though he knows he must die on his onward march.
0.268	It was love that could not be stopped by death, but overcame all the horrors of the grave.
0.269	Now, what do we say to this?
0.270	We who live in these gentler times—are we going to give up our Master when we are tried and tempted for his sake?
0.271	Young man in the workshop! It is your lot to be jeered at because you are a follower of the Savior; and will you turn back from Christ because of a jeer?
0.272	Young woman! You are laughed at because you profess the religion of Christ; shall a laugh dissolve the bond of love that knits your heart to him, when all the roar of hell could not turn his love away from you?
0.273	And you who are suffering because you hold to a religious principle, are you cast out by men? Will you not bear to have your house stripped, and to eat the bread of poverty, rather than dishonor such a Lord?
0.274	Will you not go out from this place, by the help of God’s Spirit, vowing and declaring that in life—come poverty, come wealth—and in death—come pain, or come what may—you are and must ever be the Lord’s? For this is written on your heart: “We love him, because he first loved us.”
