0.1	“For this reason God also has highly exalted him, and given him a name which is above every name: that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in heaven, and things on earth, and things under the earth; and that every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father.”—Philippians 2:9-11
0.2	I almost regret this morning that I have ventured to occupy this pulpit, because I feel utterly unable to preach to you for your profit.
0.3	I had thought that the quiet and rest of the last two weeks had removed the effects of that terrible catastrophe; but on coming back to the same spot again, and especially standing here to address you, I feel something of those same painful emotions which nearly overwhelmed me before.
0.4	You will therefore excuse me this morning if I make no reference to that solemn event, or scarcely any.
0.5	I could not preach to you on a subject that was in the least connected with it.
0.6	I would be obliged to be silent if I were to call to mind that terrifying scene in the midst of which it was my solemn lot to stand.
0.7	God will overrule it, no doubt.
0.8	It may not have been so much by the malice of men, as some have claimed; it was perhaps simple wickedness—an intention to disturb a congregation; but certainly with no thought of committing so terrible a crime as the murder of those unfortunate people.
0.9	God forgive those who were the instigators of that horrible act!
0.10	They have my forgiveness from the depths of my soul.
0.11	It will not stop us, however; we are not in the least daunted by it.
0.12	I will preach there again yet; yes, and God will give us souls there, and Satan’s empire will tremble more than ever.
0.13	“God is with us; who is he that will be against us?”
0.14	The text I have selected is one that has comforted me and, in great measure, enabled me to come here today—the mere reflection on it had such power to comfort my depressed spirit.
0.15	It is this: “For this reason God also has highly exalted him, and given him a name which is above every name: that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in heaven, and things on earth, and things under the earth; and that every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father.”—Philippians 2:9-11.
0.16	I will not attempt to preach on this text; I will only make a few remarks that have occurred to my own mind; for I could not preach today; I have been utterly unable to study, but I thought that even a few words might be acceptable to you this morning, and I trust your loving hearts to excuse them.
0.17	O Spirit of God, magnify your strength in your servant’s weakness, and enable him to honor his Lord, even when his soul is cast down within him.
0.18	When the mind is intensely set on one object, however much it may be tossed to and fro by various calamities, it invariably returns to the place which it had chosen as its dwelling place.
0.19	You have noticed this in the case of David.
0.20	When the battle had been won by his warriors, they returned flushed with victory.
0.21	David’s mind had no doubt suffered much agitation in the meantime; he had dreaded the effects of victory and of defeat alike; but have you not noticed how his mind in one moment returned to the cherished object of his affections?
0.22	“Is the young man Absalom safe?” he said, as if nothing else that had happened mattered, if only his beloved son were secure!
0.23	So, beloved, it is with the Christian.
0.24	In the midst of calamities, whether they are the wreck of nations, the crash of empires, the upheaval of revolutions, or the scourge of war, the great question which he asks himself, and asks of others too, is this—Is Christ’s kingdom safe?
0.25	In his own personal afflictions his chief anxiety is—Will God be glorified, and will his honor be increased by it?
0.26	If it is so, he says, although I am only like smoking flax, yet if the sun is not dimmed I will rejoice; and though I am a bruised reed, if the pillars of the temple are unbroken, what does it matter that my reed is bruised?
0.27	He finds it sufficient consolation, in the midst of all the breaking in pieces which he endures, to think that Christ’s throne stands fast and firm, and that though the earth has rocked beneath his feet, yet Christ stands on a rock which can never be moved.
0.28	Some of these feelings, I think, have crossed our minds.
0.29	Amid much tumult and many rushings to and fro of troubled thoughts, our souls have returned to the cherished object of our desires, and we have found it no small consolation after all to say, “It does not matter what becomes of us: God has highly exalted him, and given him a name which is above every name: that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow.”
0.30	This text has given sweet consolation to every heir of heaven.
0.31	Allow me, very briefly, to give you its consolations.
0.32	To the true Christian there is much comfort in the very fact of Christ’s exaltation.
0.33	In the second place, there is no small degree of consolation in the reason for it.
0.34	“For this reason God also has highly exalted him”; that is, because of his previous humiliation.
0.35	And third, there is no small amount of truly divine comfort in the thought of the person who has exalted Christ.
0.36	“For this reason God also”—although men despise him and cast him down—“God also has highly exalted him.”
0.37	I. First, then, IN THE VERY FACT OF CHRIST’S EXALTATION THERE IS A VERY LARGE DEGREE OF COMFORT FOR EVERY TRUE CHRISTIAN.
0.38	Many of you who have no part or share in spiritual things, having no love for Christ nor any desire for his glory, will only laugh when I say that this is a very bottle of cordial to the lips of the weary Christian—that Christ, after all, is glorified.
0.39	To you it is no consolation, because you lack that condition of heart which makes this text sweet to the soul.
0.40	To you there is no joy in it; it does not stir your heart; it gives no sweetness to your life; for this very reason, that you are not joined to Christ’s cause, nor do you devoutly seek to honor him.
0.41	But the true Christian’s heart leaps for joy, even when cast down by various sorrows and temptations, at the remembrance that Christ is exalted, for in that he finds enough to cheer his own heart.
0.42	Note here, beloved, that the Christian has certain features in his character which make the exaltation of Christ a matter of great joy to him.
0.43	First, he has in his own opinion—and not in his own opinion only, but in reality—a relationship to Christ, and therefore he feels an interest in the success of his kinsman.
0.44	You have watched the father’s joy when, step by step, his boy has climbed to wealth or fame; you have seen the mother’s eye sparkle with delight when her daughter grew up to womanhood and burst forth in all the grandeur of beauty.
0.45	You have asked why they should feel such interest; and you have been told, because the boy was his, or the girl was hers.
0.46	They delighted in the advancement of their little ones because of their relationship.
0.47	Had there been no relationship, they might have been raised to be kings, emperors, or queens, and they would have felt but little delight.
0.48	But because of the fact of kinship, each step was invested with a deep and stirring interest.
0.49	Now, it is so with this Christian.
0.50	He feels that Jesus Christ, the glorified “Prince of the kings of the earth,” is his brother.
0.51	While he reveres him as God, he admires him as the man Christ, bone of his bone and flesh of his flesh, and he delights, in his calm and peaceful moments of communion with Jesus, to say to him, “O Lord, you are my brother.”
0.52	His song is, “My beloved is mine, and I am his.”
0.53	It is his joy to sing—
0.54	“In the blood with sinners one,”
0.55	Christ Jesus is; for he is a man, just as we are: and he is no less and no more man than we are, except only for sin.
0.56	Surely, when we feel we are related to Christ, his exaltation is the source of the greatest joy to our spirits; we take delight in it, seeing it is one of our family who is exalted.
0.57	It is the Elder Brother of the one great family of God in heaven and earth; it is the Brother to whom all of us are related.
0.58	There is also in the Christian not merely the feeling of relationship, but a feeling of unity in the cause.
0.59	He feels that when Christ is exalted, he himself is exalted in some degree, seeing he shares his desire to promote the great cause and honor of God in the world.
0.60	I have no doubt that every common soldier who stood by the side of the Duke of Wellington felt honored when the commander was applauded for the victory; for, he said, “I helped him, I assisted him; it was only a lowly part that I played; I only held my place in the ranks; I only endured the enemy’s fire; but now the victory is won.
0.61	I feel an honor in it, for I helped, in some degree, to win it.”
0.62	So the Christian, when he sees his Lord exalted, says, “It is the Captain who is exalted, and in his exaltation all his soldiers share.
0.63	Have I not stood by his side?
0.64	Little was the work I did, and poor the strength which I possessed to serve him; but still I helped in the labor”; and the commonest soldier in the spiritual ranks feels that he himself is in some degree exalted when he reads this—“For this reason God also has highly exalted him, and given him a name which is above every name”: a renown above every name—“that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow.”
0.65	Moreover, the Christian knows not only that there is this unity in purpose, but that there is a real union between Christ and all his people.
0.66	It is a doctrine of revelation seldom dwelt upon, but never thought of too much—the doctrine that Christ and his members are all one.
0.67	Do you not know, beloved, that every member of Christ’s church is a member of Christ himself?
0.68	We are “of his flesh and of his bones,” parts of his great mystical body; and when we read that our head is crowned, O rejoice, you members of his, his feet or his hands: though the crown is not on you, yet being on your Head, you share the glory, for you are one with him.
0.69	See Christ there, sitting at his Father’s right hand!
0.70	Believer! he is the pledge of your glorification; he is the guarantee of your acceptance; and, moreover, he is your representative.
0.71	The seat which Christ possesses in heaven he holds not only by his own right, as a person of the Godhead, but he holds it also as the representative of the whole church, for he is their forerunner, and he sits in glory as the representative of every one of them.
0.72	O rejoice, believer, when you see your Master raised from the tomb, when you behold him exalted up to heaven.
0.73	Then, when you see him climb the steps of light and sit on his lofty throne, where the sight of angels can scarcely reach him—when you hear the acclamations of a thousand seraphs—when you note the loud, pealing choral symphony of millions of the redeemed; think, when you see him crowned with light—think that you are exalted too in him, seeing that you are a part of himself.
0.74	Happy are you if you know this, not only in doctrine, but in sweet experience too.
0.75	Knit to Christ, wedded to him, grown into him, parts and portions of his very self, we throb with the heart of the body; when the head itself is glorified we share in the praise; we feel that his glorification bestows an honor on us.
0.76	Ah! beloved, have you ever felt that unity with Christ?
0.77	Have you ever felt a unity of desire with him?
0.78	If so, you will find this rich with comfort; but if not—if you do not know Christ—it will be a source of grief rather than a pleasure to you that he is exalted, for you will have to reflect that he is exalted to crush you, exalted to judge you and condemn you, exalted to sweep this earth of its sins, and cut the curse up by the roots, and you with it, unless you repent and turn to God with full purpose of heart.
0.79	There is yet another feeling which I think is extremely necessary for any very great enjoyment of this truth, that Christ is exalted.
0.80	It is a feeling of entire surrender of one’s whole being to the great work of seeking to honor him.
0.81	Oh! I have striven for that: how I wish to God I might attain it!
0.82	I have now concentrated all my prayers into one, and that one prayer is this, that I may die to self and live wholly for him.
0.83	It seems to me to be the highest stage of man—to have no wish, no thought, no desire but Christ—to feel that to die would be bliss, if it were for Christ—that to live in poverty and woe, and scorn, and contempt, and misery, would be sweet for Christ—to feel that it did not matter what became of oneself, so long as one’s Master was exalted—to feel that though, like a withered leaf, you are blown in the gale, you do not care at all where you are going, so long as you feel that the Master’s hand is guiding you according to his will.
0.84	Or rather to feel that though, like the diamond, you must be cut, you do not care how sharply you may be cut, so that you may be made fit to be a brilliant in his crown; that you care little what may be done to you, if only you may honor him.
0.85	If any of you have attained that sweet feeling of self-annihilation, you will look up to Christ as if he were the sun, and you will say of yourself, “O Lord, I see your beams; I feel myself to be not a beam from you—but darkness, swallowed up in your light.
0.86	The most I ask is that you would live in me, that the life I live in the flesh may not be my life, but your life in me, that I may say with emphasis, as Paul did, ‘For me to live is Christ.’”
0.87	A man who has attained this need never care what the opinion of this world is.
0.88	He may say, “Do you praise me?
0.89	Do you flatter me?
0.90	Take back your flatteries: I do not ask them at your hands; I sought to praise my Master; you have laid the praises at my door; go, lay them at his, and not at mine.
0.91	Do you scorn me?
0.92	Do you despise me?
0.93	Thrice happy am I to bear it.
0.94	If only you will not scorn and despise him!”
0.95	And if you will, yet know this, that he is beyond your scorn; and therefore strike the soldier for his Captain’s sake; yes, strike, strike; but the King you cannot touch—he is highly exalted—and though you think you have won the victory, you may have routed one soldier of the army, but the main body is triumphant.
0.96	One soldier seems to be struck down to the dust, but the Captain is coming on with his victorious cohorts, and will trample you, flushed with your false victory, beneath his conquering feet.
0.97	As long as there is a particle of selfishness remaining in us, it will spoil our sweet rejoicing in Christ; until we get rid of it, we will never feel constant joy.
0.98	I do think that the root of sorrow is self.
0.99	If we once got rid of that, sorrow would be sweet, sickness would be health, sadness would be joy, poverty would be wealth, as far as our feelings about them are concerned.
0.100	They might not be changed, but our feelings under them would be vastly different.
0.101	If you would seek happiness, seek it at the roots of your selfishness; cut up your selfishness, and you will be happy.
0.102	I have found that whenever I have yielded to the least joy, then I have been prepared to feel acutely the arrows of the enemy; but when I have said of the praises of men, “Yes, what are you? Worthless things!”—then I could also say of their contempt—“Come on! come on!
0.103	I will send you all where I sent the praises; you may go together and fight your battles with one another; but as for me, let your arrows rattle on my armor—they must not, and they shall not, reach my flesh.”
0.104	But if you give way to the one, you will give way to the other.
0.105	You must seek and learn to live wholly in Christ—to sorrow when you see Christ maligned and dishonored, to rejoice when you see him exalted—and then you will have constant cause for joy.
0.106	Sit down now, O reviled one, poor, despised, and tempted one; sit down, lift up your eyes, see him on his throne, and say within yourself, “Little though I am, I know I am united to him; he is my love, my life, my joy; I do not care what happens so long as it is written, ‘The Lord reigns.’”
0.107	II. Now, briefly, on the second point.
0.108	Here also is the very fountain and wellspring of joy, in THE REASON FOR CHRIST’S EXALTATION.
0.109	“For this reason God also has highly exalted him.”
0.110	Why? Because “he, being in the form of God, did not think it robbery to be equal with God, but made himself of no reputation, and took upon himself the form of a servant, and was made in the likeness of men; and being found in outward form as a man, he humbled himself, and became obedient to death, even the death of the cross.
0.111	For this reason God also has highly exalted him.”
0.112	This of course relates to the manhood of our Lord Jesus Christ.
0.113	As God, Christ needed no exaltation; he was higher than the highest, “God over all, blessed forever.”
0.114	But the symbols of his glory having been obscured for a while, having wrapped his Godhead in mortal flesh, his flesh with his Godhead ascended on high, and the man-God, Christ Jesus, who had stooped to shame, and sorrow, and degradation, was highly exalted, “far above all principalities and powers,” that he might reign as Prince Regent over all worlds, yes, over heaven itself.
0.115	Let us consider for a moment that depth of degradation to which Christ descended; and then, my beloved, it will give you joy to think that for that very reason his manhood was highly exalted.
0.116	Do you see that man—
0.117	“The humble Man before his foes, / The weary Man and full of woes?”
0.118	Do you watch him as he speaks?
0.119	Note the marvelous eloquence which pours from his lips, and see how the crowds attend him?
0.120	But do you hear, in the distance, the growling of the thunders of calumny and scorn?
0.121	Listen to the words of his accusers.
0.122	They say he is “a gluttonous man and a drunkard, a friend of tax collectors and sinners”; “he has a demon, and is mad.”
0.123	The whole vocabulary of abuse is exhausted in vilifying him.
0.124	He is slandered, abused, persecuted!
0.125	Stop! Do you think that he is cast down by this, degraded by this?
0.126	No, for this very reason: “God has highly exalted him.”
0.127	Mark the shame and spitting that have come upon the cheek of that man of sorrows over there!
0.128	See his hair plucked by cruel hands; notice how they torture him and how they mock him.
0.129	Do you think that this is all dishonorable to Christ?
0.130	It seems so; but listen to this: “He became obedient,” and therefore “God has highly exalted him.”
0.131	Ah! there is a marvelous connection between that shame and spitting and the bending of the knees of seraphs; there is a strange yet mystic link which unites the calumny and the slander with the choral harmonies of adoring angels.
0.132	The one was, as it were, the seed of the other.
0.133	Strange that it should be so, but the black, the bitter seed brought forth a sweet and glorious flower which blooms forever.
0.134	He suffered and he reigned; he stooped to conquer, and he conquered because he stooped, and was exalted because he conquered.
0.135	Consider him further still.
0.136	Do you see him in your imagination nailed to that cross!
0.137	O eyes! you are full of pity, with tears standing thick!
0.138	Oh! how I see the floods gushing down his cheeks!
0.139	Do you see his hands bleeding, and his feet too, gushing blood?
0.140	Behold him! The bulls of Bashan surround him, and the dogs are hounding him to death!
0.141	Hear him! “Eloi, Eloi, lama sabachthani?”
0.142	The earth starts up in fright.
0.143	A God is groaning on a cross!
0.144	What! Does this not dishonor Christ?
0.145	No; it honors him!
0.146	Each of the thorns becomes a brilliant in his diadem of glory; the nails are forged into his scepter, and his wounds clothe him with the purple of empire.
0.147	The treading of the winepress has stained his garments, but not with stains of scorn and dishonor.
0.148	The stains are embroideries on his royal robes forever.
0.149	The treading of that winepress has made his garments purple with the empire of a world; and he is the Master of a universe forever.
0.150	O Christian! sit down and consider that your Master did not mount from earth’s mountains into heaven, but from her valleys.
0.151	It was not from heights of bliss on earth that he strode to bliss eternal, but from depths of woe he mounted up to glory.
0.152	Oh! what a stride that was, when, at one mighty step from the grave to the throne of the Highest, the man Christ, the God, gloriously ascended.
0.153	And yet reflect! In some way, mysterious yet true, he was exalted because he suffered.
0.154	“Being found in outward form as a man, he humbled himself, and became obedient to death, even the death of the cross.
0.155	For this reason God also has highly exalted him, and given him a name which is above every name.”
0.156	Believer, there is comfort for you here, if you will take it.
0.157	If Christ was exalted through his degradation, so will you be.
0.158	Do not count your steps to triumph by your steps upward, but by those which seem to go downward.
0.159	The way to heaven is downhill; he who would be honored forever must sink in his own esteem, and often in that of his fellow men.
0.160	Oh! do not think that that fool over there, who is mounting to heaven by his own light opinions of himself and by the flatteries of his fellows, will safely reach Paradise; no, what he rests on will burst, and he will fall and be broken in pieces.
0.161	But he who descends into the mines of suffering will find boundless riches there; and he who dives into the depths of grief will find the pearl of everlasting life within its caverns.
0.162	Remember, Christian, that you are exalted when you are disgraced; read the slanders of your enemies as the applause of the just; count the scoffing and jeering of wicked men as equal to the praise and honor of the godly; their blame is censure, and their censure praise.
0.163	Reckon too, if your body should ever be exposed to persecution, that it is no shame to you, but the reverse; and if you should be privileged (and you may be) to wear the blood-red crown of martyrdom, count it no disgrace to die.
0.164	Remember, the most honorable in the church are “the noble army of martyrs.”
0.165	Reckon that the greater the sufferings they endured, so much the greater is their “eternal weight of glory”; and so, if you stand in the brunt and thick of the fight, remember that you will stand in the midst of glory.
0.166	If you have the hardest to bear, you will have the sweetest to enjoy.
0.167	On with you, then—through floods, through fire, through death, through hell, if it should lie in your path.
0.168	Do not fear. He who glorified Christ because he stooped will glorify you; for after he has caused you to endure a while, he will give you “a crown of life which does not fade away.”
0.169	III. And now, in the last place, beloved, here is yet another comfort for you.
0.170	THE PERSON who exalted Christ is to be noticed.
0.171	“GOD also has highly exalted him.”
0.172	The emperor of all the Russians crowns himself: he is an autocrat, and puts the crown on his own head: but Christ has no such foolish pride.
0.173	Christ did not crown himself.
0.174	“GOD also has highly exalted him.”
0.175	The crown was put on the head of Christ by God; and there is to me a very sweet reflection in this—that the hand that put the crown on Christ’s head will one day put the crown on ours—that the same Mighty One who crowned Christ “King of kings, and Lord of lords,” will crown us, when he makes us “kings and priests to him forever.”
0.176	“I know,” said Paul, “there is laid up for me a crown of glory which does not fade away, which God, the righteous judge, will give me on that day.”
0.177	Now, just pause over this thought—that Christ did not crown himself, but that his Father crowned him; that he did not raise himself to the throne of majesty, but that his Father lifted him there, and placed him on his throne.
0.178	Why, reflect like this: Man never highly exalted Christ.
0.179	Then set this against it—“God also has highly exalted him.”
0.180	Man hissed at him, mocked him, hooted at him.
0.181	Words were not hard enough—they would use stones.
0.182	“They took up stones again to stone him.”
0.183	And stones failed; nails must be used, and he must be crucified.
0.184	And then there comes the taunt, the jeer, the mockery, while he hangs languishing on the cross of death.
0.185	Man did not exalt him.
0.186	Set the black picture there.
0.187	Now put this glorious, this bright scene side by side with it, and the one will be a foil to the other.
0.188	Man dishonored him; “God also exalted him.”
0.189	Believer, if all men speak ill of you, lift up your head and say, “Man did not exalt my Master; I thank him that he does not exalt me.
0.190	The servant should not be above his master, nor the servant above his lord, nor he who is sent greater than he who sent him.”
0.191	“If on my face for his dear name, / Shame and reproach shall be; / I’ll hail reproach and welcome shame, / For he’ll remember me.”
0.192	God will remember me, and highly exalt me after all, though man casts me down.
0.193	Set it, again, against the fact that Christ did not exalt himself.
0.194	Poor Christian! you feel that you cannot exalt yourself.
0.195	Sometimes you cannot raise your poor depressed spirits.
0.196	Some say to you, “Oh! you should not feel like this.”
0.197	They tell you, “Oh! you should not speak such words, nor think such thoughts.”
0.198	Ah! “the heart knows its own bitterness, and a stranger does not meddle with it”—yes, and I will improve on it, “nor a friend either.”
0.199	It is not easy to tell how another ought to feel and how another ought to act.
0.200	Our minds are made differently, each in its own mold, which mold is broken afterward, and there will never be another like it.
0.201	We are all different, each one of us; but I am sure there is one thing in which we are all brought to unite in times of deep sorrow, namely, in a sense of helplessness.
0.202	We feel that we cannot exalt ourselves.
0.203	Now remember, our Master felt just like this.
0.204	In the 22nd Psalm, which, if I read it rightly, is a beautiful soliloquy of Christ on the cross, he says to himself, “I am a worm, and no man.”
0.205	As if he felt himself so broken, so cast down, that instead of being more than a man, as he was, he felt for a while less than a man.
0.206	And yet, when he could not lift a finger to crown himself, when he could scarcely summon a thought of victory, when his eye could not flash with even a distant glimpse of triumph—then his God was crowning him.
0.207	Are you so broken in pieces, Christian?
0.208	Do not think that you are cast away forever; for “God also has highly exalted him” who did not exalt himself; and this is a picture and prophecy of what he will do for you.
0.209	And now, beloved, I can say little more on this text, except that I bid you now for a few minutes meditate and think on it.
0.210	Oh! let your eyes be lifted up; bid heaven’s blue veil divide; ask power of God—I mean spiritual power from on high—to look within the veil.
0.211	I do not bid you look to the streets of gold, nor to the walls of jasper, nor to the pearly-gated city.
0.212	I do not ask you to turn your eyes to the white-robed hosts, who forever sing loud hallelujahs; but there, my friends, turn your eyes,
0.213	“There, like a man, the Savior sits; / The God, how bright he shines; / And scatters infinite delight / On all the happy minds.”
0.214	Do you see him?
0.215	“The head that once was crowned with thorns, / Is crowned with glory now; / A royal diadem adorns / That mighty Victor’s brow.
0.216	No more the bloody crown, / The cross and nails no more: / For hell itself shakes at his frown, / And all the heavens adore.”
0.217	Look at him! Can your imagination picture him?
0.218	Behold his transcendent glory!
0.219	The majesty of kings is swallowed up; the pomp of empires dissolves like the white mist of the morning before the sun; the brightness of assembled armies is eclipsed.
0.220	He in himself is brighter than the sun, more terrible than armies with banners.
0.221	See him! See him!
0.222	O hide your heads, you monarchs; put away your gaudy pageantry, you lords of this poor narrow earth!
0.223	His kingdom knows no bounds; without a limit his vast empire stretches itself out.
0.224	Above him all is his; beneath him, many a step down, are angels, and they are his; and they cast their crowns before his feet.
0.225	With them stand his elect and ransomed, and their crowns too are his.
0.226	And here on this lower earth stand his saints, and they are his, and they adore him; and under the earth, among the inhabitants of hell, where devils growl their malice, even there is trembling and adoration; and where lost spirits, with wailing and gnashing of teeth, forever lament their existence, even there, there is the acknowledgment of his Godhead, even though the confession helps to make the fire of their torments.
0.227	In heaven, on earth, in hell, all knees bend before him, and every tongue confesses that he is God.
0.228	If not now, yet in the time that is to come this shall be carried out, that every creature of God’s making shall acknowledge his Son to be “God over all, blessed forever.
0.229	Amen.” Oh! my soul anticipates that blessed day, when this whole earth shall bend its knee before its God willingly!
0.230	I do believe there is a happy era coming, when there will not be one knee unbent before my Lord and Master.
0.231	I look for that time, that latter-day glory, when kings shall bring presents, when queens shall be the nursing mothers of the church, when the gold of Sheba and the ships of Tarshish and the dromedaries of Arabia shall alike be his, when nations and tribes of every tongue shall
0.232	“Dwell on his name with sweetest song, / And infant voices shall proclaim / Their early blessings on his name.”
0.233	Sometimes I hope to live to see that most auspicious era—that halcyon age of this world, so much oppressed with grief and sorrow by the tyranny of its own inhabitants.
0.234	I hope to see the time when it shall be said, “Shout, for the great Shepherd reigns, and his unsuffering kingdom now is come”—when earth shall be one great orchestra of praise, and every man shall sing the glorious hallelujah anthem of the King of kings.
0.235	But even now, while waiting for that era, my soul rejoices in the fact that every knee does virtually bow—though not willingly, yet really.
0.236	Does the scoffer, when he mouths at high heaven, think that he insults God?
0.237	He thinks so, but his insult dies long before it reaches halfway to the stars.
0.238	Does he imagine, when in his malice he forges a sword against Christ, that his weapon will prosper?
0.239	If he does, I can well imagine the derision of God, when he sees the wildest rebel, the most abandoned despiser, still working out his great decrees, still doing what God has eternally ordained, and in the midst of his wild rebellion still running in the very track which in some mysterious way before all eternity had been marked out as the track in which that being should certainly move.
0.240	“The wild steeds of earth have broken their bridles, the reins are out of the hands of the charioteer”—so some say; but they are not, or if they are, the steeds run the same course as they would have done had the Almighty still grasped the reins.
0.241	The world has not gone to confusion; chance is not God; God is still Master, and let men do what they will, and hate the truth we now prize, they will after all do what God wills, and their direst rebellion will prove to be but a kind of obedience, though they do not know it.
0.242	But you will say, “Why do you still find fault? For who has resisted such a will as that?”
0.243	“No, but O man, who are you that answers back against God?
0.244	Shall the thing that is formed say to the one who formed it, Why have you made me this way?
0.245	Has the potter not power over the clay, to make out of the same lump one vessel to honor and another to dishonor?
0.246	What if God, willing to display his wrath and to make his power known, bore with much long-suffering the vessels of wrath fitted to destruction: and that he might make known the riches of his glory upon the vessels of mercy, which he had before made ready for glory.”
0.247	Who is he that shall blame him?
0.248	Woe to the one who strives with his Maker!
0.249	He is God—know that, you inhabitants of the land; and all things, after all, shall serve his will.
0.250	I like what Luther says in his bold hymn, where, notwithstanding all that those who hate predestination choose to affirm, he knew and boldly declared, “He everywhere has sway, and all things serve his might.”
0.251	Notwithstanding all they do, there is God’s sway, after all.
0.252	Go on, reviler! God knows how to turn all your revilings into songs!
0.253	Go on, you warrior against God, if you will; know this: your sword shall help to magnify God and carve out glory for Christ, when you intended the slaughter of his church.
0.254	It shall come to pass that all you do will be frustrated; for God makes the diviners mad, and says, “Where is the wisdom of the scribe?
0.255	Where is the wisdom of the wise?”
0.256	Surely, “Him God has exalted, and given him a name which is above every name.”
0.257	And now, lastly, beloved, if it is true, as it is, that Christ is so exalted that he is to have a name above every name, and every knee is to bow to him, will we not bow our knees this morning before his Majesty?
0.258	You must, whether you will or not, one day bow your knee.
0.259	O iron-sinewed sinner, bow your knee now!
0.260	You will have to bow it, man, on that day when the lightnings are let loose and the thunders roll in wild fury: you will have to bow your knee then.
0.261	Oh! bow it now!
0.262	“Kiss the Son, lest he be angry, and you perish from the way, when his wrath is kindled even a little.”
0.263	O Lord of hosts! bend the knees of men!
0.264	Make us all the willing subjects of your grace, lest afterward we should be the unwilling slaves of your terror, dragged with chains of vengeance down to hell.
0.265	O that those who are on earth might now willingly bend their knees, lest in hell it should be fulfilled, “Things under the earth shall bow the knee before him.”
0.266	God bless you, my friends; I can say no more than that.
0.267	God bless you, for Jesus’ sake! Amen.
