0.1	“You are my friends if you do whatever I command you.”—John 15:14.
0.2	Our Lord Jesus Christ is beyond all comparison the best of friends: a friend in need, a friend indeed.
0.3	“Friend!” said Socrates, “there is no friend!” But Socrates did not know our Lord Jesus, or he would have added, “except the Savior.”
0.4	In the heart of our Lord Jesus there burns such friendship toward us that all other forms of it are like dim candles beside the sun.
0.5	“Greater love has no man than this, that he lay down his life for his friend.”
0.6	An ordinary man has gone as far as he possibly can when he has died for his friend; and yet he would have died anyway, so that in dying for his friend he only pays, somewhat ahead of time, a debt which must inevitably have been paid a little further on.
0.7	With Christ there was no necessity to die at all, and this, therefore, places his love and his friendship alone by itself.
0.8	He died who did not need to die, and died in agony when he might have lived in glory: never did any man give such proof of friendship as this.
0.9	Let the friendship of our Lord to us stand as the model of our friendship to him.
0.10	It cannot be so in every respect, because our situations and conditions are different: his must always be the love of the greater to the lesser, the love of the benefactor to one in need, the love of the Redeemer to those who are bought with a price; but, setting those points aside, the whole tone and spirit of our Lord’s friendship are such that the more closely we can imitate it, the better.
0.11	Such friendship as his should be reflected in a friendship most hearty and self-sacrificing on our part.
0.12	Our Lord does not, I think, in this text speak to us about his being our friend, but about our being his friends.
0.13	He is “the friend of sinners”; but sinners are not his friends until their hearts are changed.
0.14	“You are my friends if you do whatever I command you”; we are not his friends until then.
0.15	His love to us comes entirely from himself, but friendship needs something from us.
0.16	Friendship cannot be all on one side: one-sided friendship is more fittingly called mercy, grace, or benevolence; friendship in its full sense is mutual.
0.17	You may do all you like for a man and be perfectly benevolent, and yet he may make you no return; but friendship can only exist where there is a response.
0.18	Hence, the question before us is not whether Christ loves us or not, or whether Christ has pity on us or not; for in another part of Scripture we read of “his great love with which he loved us even when we were dead in trespasses and sins.”
0.19	He befriended us when we were enemies, but that is not our subject just now: the question is about our being friends to him, and such we must be made if, indeed, there is to be any intimacy of mutual friendship.
0.20	Friendship cannot be, as I have said before, all on one side; it is like a pair of scales—there must be something to balance on the other side; there must be a return of kindly feeling from the person loved.
0.21	Jesus tells us here that if we are to be his friends we must do whatever he commands us, and do it out of love for him.
0.22	Beloved, it is the highest honor in the world to be called the friend of Christ.
0.23	Surely there is no title that excels in dignity the one worn by Abraham, who was called “The friend of God.”
0.24	Lord Brooke was so delighted with the friendship of Sir Philip Sydney that he ordered nothing but this to be engraved upon his tomb: “Here lies the friend of Sir Philip Sydney.”
0.25	There is beauty in such a feeling, but it is still a small matter compared with being able to say, “Here lives a friend of Christ.”
0.26	O wondrous condescension, that he should call me “friend”!
0.27	If I am indeed a true believer, not only is he my friend—without which I could have no hope here or hereafter—but he has, in the abundance of his grace, been pleased to regard me as his friend, and to write me down in the honored list of intimates who are permitted to speak familiarly with him, as those do between whom there are no secrets; for their hearts are poured out to him, while he hides nothing from them, but says, “If it were not so, I would have told you.”
0.28	Beloved, in what a light this sets obedience to Christ’s commandments!
0.29	I cannot help noticing, at this early moment in the sermon, how the doctrine of our text transfigures obedience and makes it the joy and glory of life.
0.30	How precious it is, for it is a better seal of friendship than the possession of the largest gifts and influence.
0.31	Christ does not say, “You are my friends if you rise to a position of respectability among men, or of honor in the church.”
0.32	No, however poor you may be—and those to whom he spoke these words were very poor—he says, “You are my friends if you do whatever I command you.”
0.33	Obedience is better than wealth and better than rank.
0.34	Jesus values his friends not by what they have, or what they wear, but by what they do.
0.35	We may regard all eleven apostles as having remarkable qualifications for their life’s work; yet their Lord does not say, “You are my friends because I have endowed you with abilities for the apostleship.”
0.36	Even to these leaders of his sacramental host Jesus says plainly, “You are my friends if you do whatever I command you.”
0.37	That is the point by which your friendship shall be tested: “If you are obedient, you are my friends.”
0.38	He says neither less nor more to any of us who today aspire to the high dignity of being included within the circle of his personal friendship.
0.39	You must, my brothers, yield obedience to your Master and Lord, and be eager to do it, or you are not his bosom friends.
0.40	This is the one essential, which grace alone can give us.
0.41	Do we rebel against the request?
0.42	Far from it; our joy and delight lie in bearing our Beloved’s easy yoke.
0.43	I. Let us come to the subject more closely, and notice first that OUR LORD HIMSELF TELLS US WHAT OBEDIENCE HE REQUESTS from those who call themselves his friends.
0.44	True friends are eager to know what they can do to please the ones they love; let us gladly listen to what our adorable Lord now says to the select circle of his chosen ones.
0.45	He asks obedience of each and every one.
0.46	None of us is exempted from doing his commandments.
0.47	However lofty or however lowly our condition, we must obey; if we have only one talent, we must obey, and if we have ten, still we must obey.
0.48	There can be no friendship with Christ unless we are willing, each one, to give him hearty, loyal service.
0.49	Let it go round, then, to all of you on whom the name of Jesus Christ is named: if you are enrolled among the friends of Jesus, you must be careful about your own personal obedience to his blessed will.
0.50	Do not forget that even to the queen, standing at his right hand in gold of Ophir, the word is given, “He is your Lord, and worship him.”
0.51	It must be active obedience—notice that.
0.52	“You are my friends if you do whatever I command you.”
0.53	Some think it is quite sufficient if they avoid what he forbids.
0.54	Abstaining from evil is a great part of righteousness, but it is not enough for friendship.
0.55	A man may say, “I am not a drunkard, I am not dishonest, I am not unchaste, I am not a violator of the Sabbath, I am not a liar”; so far so good, but such righteousness does not exceed that of the scribes and Pharisees, and they cannot enter the kingdom.
0.56	It is well if you do not willfully transgress, but if you are to be Christ’s friends there must be far more than this.
0.57	It would be a poor friendship which only said, “I am your friend, and to prove it, I don’t insult you, I don’t rob you, I don’t speak evil of you.”
0.58	Surely there must be more positive evidence to certify friendship.
0.59	The Lord Jesus Christ lays great stress upon positive duties: it is, “if you do whatever I command you.”
0.60	At the last day he will say, “I was hungry, and you gave me food; I was thirsty, and you gave me drink.”
0.61	In that memorable twenty-fifth chapter of Matthew nothing is said about negative virtues; but positive actions are cited and dwelt upon in detail.
0.62	You know it is an old English saying, “He is my friend who grinds at my mill.”
0.63	That is to say, friendship shows itself in doing helpful acts, which prove sincerity.
0.64	Fine words are mere wind, and count for nothing if they are not backed up with substantial deeds of kindness.
0.65	Friendship cannot live on windy talk; it needs the bread of plain fact.
0.66	The inspired word says, “Show me a proof of your love; show it by doing whatever I command you.”
0.67	It is clear from the wording of the text that the obedience Christ expects from us is continuous.
0.68	He does not say, “If you do it on Sundays, for instance—if you do what I command you in your place of worship, that will suffice”; no, we are to abide in him and keep his statutes even to the end.
0.69	I am not now preaching works as the way of salvation, but as the evidences of fellowship, which is quite another thing.
0.70	We must seek in every place, at all times, and under all circumstances, to do as Jesus tells us, out of a cheerful spirit of reverence for him.
0.71	Such tender, loving submission as a godly wife gives to her husband must be gladly yielded by us throughout life if we are his friends.
0.72	This obedience must also be universal.
0.73	“You are my friends if you do whatever I command you.”
0.74	No sooner is anything found to be the subject of a command than the man who is a true friend of Christ says, “I will do it,” and he does it.
0.75	He does not pick and choose which precept he will keep and which he will neglect, for this is self-will and not obedience.
0.76	I have known some professing Christians err greatly in this matter.
0.77	They have been very strict about one point, and they have blamed everybody who did not come up to their strictness, talking as if that one duty fulfilled the whole law.
0.78	Straining at gnats has been a leading business with many; they have bought a choice assortment of strainers of the very finest mesh to get all the gnats out of their cup, but at the same time, on another day, they have opened their mouths and swallowed a camel without a qualm.
0.79	This will not do: the test is, “If you do whatever I command you.”
0.80	I do not mean that little things are unimportant: far from it.
0.81	If there is a gnat that Christ tells you to strain out, strain it out with great diligence; do not let a midge escape you if he tells you to remove it.
0.82	The smallest command of Christ may often be the most important; and I will tell you why.
0.83	Some things are great, obviously great, and for many reasons even a hypocritical professor will attend to them; but the test may lie in the minor points, which hypocrites do not take the trouble to notice, since no human tongue would praise them for doing so.
0.84	Here is the proof of your love.
0.85	Will you do the smaller thing for Jesus as well as the weightier matter?
0.86	Too many say, “I do not see any use in it; I can be saved without it; there are a great many different opinions on the point,” and so on.
0.87	All this comes from evil, and is not consistent with the spirit of friendship with Christ, for love pleases even in trifles.
0.88	Is it Christ’s will?
0.89	Is it plainly a precept of his word?
0.90	Then it is not yours to reason why, nor to raise any question.
0.91	The reality of your submission to your Lord and Master may hinge upon those seemingly insignificant points.
0.92	A household servant might place the breakfast on the table and feel that she had done her duty; but if her mistress told her to place the salt at the corner, and she did not, she would be asked the reason for her neglect.
0.93	Suppose she replied to her mistress, “I did not think it necessary; I placed the breakfast before you, but a little salt was too trifling a matter for me to bother about.”
0.94	Her mistress might answer, “But I told you to be sure to put out the saltcellar.
0.95	Mind you do so tomorrow.”
0.96	Next morning there is no salt, and the maid says she did not see the use of setting it on the table.
0.97	Her mistress is displeased, and tells her that her wish must be carried out.
0.98	Will she not be a very foolish and exasperating girl if she refuses to do so because she does not see the use of it?
0.99	I think it is likely that the young woman would have to find another position before long, for such conduct is very annoying.
0.100	So it is with those professors who say, “I have attended to the main things, and what I neglect is quite a minor matter.”
0.101	Such people are not even good servants; friends they never can be.
0.102	I urge you, dear brothers, labor after universal obedience.
0.103	“Whatever he says to you, do it.”
0.104	Only by an earnest effort to carry out the whole of his will can you live in happy fellowship with him, and be indeed his friends.
0.105	Note well that this obedience is to be rendered as to Christ himself.
0.106	Put the emphasis on the little word I: “You are my friends if you do whatever I command you.”
0.107	We are to do these things because Jesus commands them.
0.108	Does not the royal person of our Lord cast a very strong light upon the necessity of obedience?
0.109	When we refuse to obey, we refuse to do what the Lord himself commands.
0.110	When the Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God and our Redeemer, is denied obedience, it is treason.
0.111	How can rebels against the King be his Majesty’s friends?
0.112	The precepts of Scripture are not the commandments of man nor the ordinances of angels, but the laws of Christ; and how dare we despise them?
0.113	We are to act rightly because Jesus commands us, and because we love to do his pleasure; there can be no friendship without this.
0.114	Oh, for grace to serve the Lord with gladness!
0.115	To close this first point, it appears that our Lord would have us obey him out of a friendly spirit.
0.116	Obedience to Christ as if we were forced to do it under pains and penalties would be of no worth as a proof of friendship; everyone can see that.
0.117	He speaks not of slaves, but of friends; he would not have us perform duties from fear of punishment or love of reward; what he can accept from his friends must be the fruit of love.
0.118	His will must be our law because his person is our delight.
0.119	Some professors need to be whipped to their duties; they must hear stirring sermons, and attend exciting meetings, and live under pressure; but those who are Christ’s friends need no spur but love.
0.120	“The love of Christ compels us.”
0.121	True hearts do what Jesus tells them without flogging and dogging, urging and forcing.
0.122	Forced virtue is spoiled in the making, as many a piece of earthenware is cracked in the baking.
0.123	The wine of our obedience must flow freely from the ripe cluster of the soul’s love, or it will not be fit for the royal cup.
0.124	When duty becomes delight and precepts are as sweet as promises, then we are Christ’s friends, and not until then.
0.125	II. Having thus set forth what kind of obedience Christ requests, I now notice, in the second place, that our Lord leads us to gather from this sentence that THOSE WHO DO NOT OBEY HIM ARE NO FRIENDS OF HIS.
0.126	He may yet look upon them and be their friend by changing their hearts and forgiving their sins; but as yet they are no friends of his, for a man who does not obey Christ does not give the Savior his proper place, and this is an unfriendly deed.
0.127	If I have a friend, I am very careful that, if he is honored anywhere, he shall certainly receive due respect from me.
0.128	If he is my superior, I am anxious that he should not think me intrusive, or imagine that I would take undue advantage of his kindness.
0.129	He will be higher in my esteem than in the regard of anyone else.
0.130	He who is truly Christ’s friend delights to honor him as a great king, but he who will not yield him his sovereign rights is a traitor and not a friend.
0.131	Our Lord is the head over all things to his church, and this involves the joyful submission of the members: disobedience denies Christ the dignity of that holy Headship which is his prerogative over all the members of his mystical body, and this is not the part of a true friend.
0.132	How can you be his friend if you will not admit his rule?
0.133	It is vain to boast that you trust his cross if you do not reverence his crown.
0.134	He who does not do his commandments cannot be Christ’s friend, because he is not of one mind with Christ: that is evident.
0.135	Can two walk together unless they are agreed?
0.136	True friendship does not exist between those who differ on first principles, and there can be no points of agreement between Jesus Christ and the man who will not obey him; for he in fact says, “Lord Jesus, your pure and holy will is offensive to me; your sweet and gracious commands are a weariness to me.”
0.137	What friendship can there be here?
0.138	They are not of one mind: Christ is for holiness, this man is for sin; Christ is for spiritual-mindedness, this man is carnally minded; Christ is for love, this man is for self; Christ is for glorifying the Father, this man is for honoring himself: how can there be any friendship when they are diametrically opposed in design, object, and spirit?
0.139	It is not possible.
0.140	He who does not obey Christ cannot be Christ’s friend, though he may profess to be.
0.141	He may be a very high and loud professor, and for that very reason he may be all the more an enemy of the cross: for when men see this man walking according to his own lusts they cry out, “You also were with Jesus of Nazareth,” and they attribute all his faults to his religion, and immediately begin to blaspheme the name of Christ.
0.142	Through the inconsistent conduct of our Lord’s professed friends his cause is hindered more than by anything else.
0.143	Suppose you and I had some very intimate associate who was found drunk in the street, or committing burglary or theft; should we not feel disgraced by his conduct?
0.144	When he was brought before the magistrate, would you like to have it said, “This person is the bosom friend of So-and-so”?
0.145	Oh, you would cover your face and beg your neighbors never to mention it.
0.146	For such a fellow to be known as your friend would compromise your name and character.
0.147	We say this even with tears: that Jesus Christ’s name is compromised, and his honor is tarnished among men, by many who wear the name of Christian without having the spirit of Christ; such cannot be his dear companions.
0.148	Alas, for the wounds which Jesus has received in the house of his friends!
0.149	When Caesar fell, he was slain by the daggers of his friends!
0.150	In trust he found treason.
0.151	Those whose lives he had spared did not spare his life.
0.152	Woe to those who, under the garb of Christianity, crucify the Lord afresh and put him to open shame.
0.153	Nothing burns Christ’s cheek like a Judas kiss, and he has had many such.
0.154	Those who do not obey him cannot be acknowledged by Jesus as his friends, for that would dishonor him indeed.
0.155	There was a time—I do not know how it is now—when if any man wanted to be made a count, or to get an honorable title, he had only to pay so much at Rome into the Papal treasury, and he could be made a noble at once.
0.156	The titles thus purchased were honorable neither to those who gave them nor to those who received them.
0.157	Whatever his pretended vicar may do, our Lord himself sells no dignities.
0.158	The title of “friends of Jesus” goes with a certain character, and cannot be obtained in any other way.
0.159	Those are his friends who obey him: “If you love me, keep my commandments.”
0.160	He grants this patent of nobility to all believers who lovingly follow him, but on his list of friends he enters no one else.
0.161	Do you not see that his honor requires this?
0.162	Would you have our Lord stand up and say, “The drunkard is my friend”?
0.163	Would you hear him say, “That fraudulent bankrupt is my intimate companion”?
0.164	Would you have Jesus claim friendly companionship with the vicious and profane?
0.165	A man is known by the company he keeps; what would be thought of Jesus if his intimate associates were men of loose morals and unrighteous principles?
0.166	To go among them for their good is one thing; to make them his friends is another.
0.167	Where there is no kinship, no likeness, no point of agreement, the fair flower of friendship cannot take root.
0.168	We may, therefore, read the text negatively: “You are not my friends if you do not do the things which I command you.”
0.169	III. Our third observation is: THOSE WHO BEST OBEY CHRIST ARE ON THE BEST OF TERMS WITH HIM.
0.170	“You are my friends,” he seems to say, “and you live near to me, enjoying practical personal friendship and daily fellowship with me, when you promptly obey.”
0.171	Some of you know by personal experience, brothers and sisters, that you cannot walk in holy communion with Christ unless you keep his commandments.
0.172	There is no feeling of communion between our souls and Christ when we are conscious of having done wrong and yet are not sorry for it.
0.173	If we know that we have erred, as we often do, and our hearts break because we have grieved our Beloved, and we go and tell him our grief and confess our sin, we are still his friends, and he kisses away our tears, saying, “I know your weakness: I willingly blot out your offenses.
0.174	There is no breach of friendship between us; I will still reveal myself to you.”
0.175	When we know that we are wrong, and feel no softening of heart about it, then we cannot pray, we cannot speak with the Beloved, and we cannot walk with him as his friends.
0.176	Familiarity with Jesus ceases when we become familiar with known sin.
0.177	Again, if, knowing an act to be wrong, we persist in it, there cannot be any happy friendship between us and our Savior.
0.178	If conscience has told you, dear brother, that such and such a thing ought to be given up, and you continue in it, the next time you are on your knees you will feel greatly hampered; and when you sit down before your open Bible and hope to have communion with Christ as you formerly enjoyed it, you will find that he has withdrawn himself and will not be found by you.
0.179	Is it any wonder?
0.180	If sin lies at the door, how can the Lord smile on us?
0.181	Secret sin will poison communion at the fountainhead.
0.182	If there is a quarrel between you and Christ, and you are hugging to your bosom what he abhors, how can you enjoy friendship?
0.183	He tells you that sin is a viper that will kill you, but you reply, “It is a necklace of jewels,” and therefore you put it around your neck.
0.184	Do you wonder that, because he loves you, he is grieved at such mad behavior?
0.185	Oh, do not bring injury upon yourself in this way.
0.186	Do not pour contempt upon his wise commands in this way.
0.187	Some Christians will never enter into full fellowship with Christ because they neglect to study his word and search out what his will is.
0.188	It ought to be a serious work with every Christian, especially at the start of his course, to find out what the will of his Lord is on all subjects.
0.189	Half the Christian people in the world are content to ask, “What is the rule of our church?”
0.190	That is not the question: the point is, “What is the rule of Christ?”
0.191	Some plead, “My father and mother did so before me.”
0.192	I sympathize in some measure with that feeling—filial reverence commands admiration; but yet in spiritual things we are to call no man “father,” but make the Lord Jesus our master and example.
0.193	God has not placed your conscience in your mother’s keeping, nor has he committed to your father the right or the power to stand responsible for you: every man must bear his own burden and render his own account; search the Scriptures for yourselves, each one of you, and follow no rule but the one which is inspired.
0.194	Take your light directly from the sun.
0.195	Let holy Scripture be your unquestioned rule of faith and practice; and if there is any point about which you are uncertain, I charge you by your loyalty to Christ, if you are his friends, try to find out what his will is; and once you are sure on that point, never mind the human authorities or dignities that oppose his law.
0.196	Let there be no question, no hesitation, no delay.
0.197	If he commands you, carry out his will though the gates of hell thunder at you.
0.198	You are not his friends—or, at any rate, you are not his friends in such a way as to enjoy the friendship—unless you resolutely seek to please him in all things.
0.199	The intimacy between you and Christ will be disturbed by sin; you cannot lean your head upon his bosom and say, “Lord, I know your will, but I do not mean to do it.”
0.200	Could you look up into that dear face—that face once so marred, now lovelier than heaven itself—and say, “My Lord, I love you, but I will not do your will in every point”?
0.201	By the very love he bears you, he will chasten you for that rebellious spirit if you indulge it.
0.202	It is a horrible evil; holy eyes will not endure it.
0.203	He is a jealous lover, and will not tolerate sin, which is his rival.
0.204	“You are my friends if you do whatever I command you.”
0.205	Oh, beloved, see to this!
0.206	Under all the crosses, and losses, and trials of life there is no comfort more desirable than the confidence that you have aimed at doing your Lord’s will.
0.207	If a man suffers for Christ’s sake while steadily pursuing the course of holiness, he may rejoice in such suffering.
0.208	Losses borne in defense of the right and the true are gains.
0.209	Jesus is never nearer to his friends than when they bravely bear shame for his sake.
0.210	If we get into trouble by our own folly, we feel the sting at our very heart; but if we are wounded in our Lord’s battles, the scars are honorable.
0.211	For his sake we may accept reproach, and bind it about us as a wreath of honor.
0.212	Jesus delights to be the Companion of those who are cast out by relatives and acquaintances for the truth’s sake and for faithfulness to his cross.
0.213	They may call the faithful one a fanatic, and an enthusiast, and all such ill-sounding names; but there is no need to fret over these, for the honor of being Christ’s friend infinitely outweighs the world’s opinion.
0.214	When we follow the Lamb wherever he goes, he is responsible for the results; we are not.
0.215	“Though dark be my way, since he is my guide, / It’s mine to obey, it’s his to provide.”
0.216	The consequences that follow from our doing right belong to God.
0.217	Abhor the theory that for the sake of a great good you may do a little wrong.
0.218	I have heard men say—yes, and Christian men too—“If I were strictly to follow my convictions I would have to leave a post of great usefulness, and therefore I remain where I am, and quiet my conscience as well as I can.
0.219	I would lose opportunities of doing good which I now possess if I were to put into practice all I believe, and therefore I remain in a position which I could not justify on any other ground.”
0.220	Is this according to the mind of Jesus?
0.221	Is this your kindness to your friend?
0.222	How many bow in the house of Rimmon, and hope that the Lord will have mercy upon his servants in this thing!
0.223	We shall see if it will be so.
0.224	We may not do evil that good may come.
0.225	If I knew that doing right would shake this whole island, I would be bound to do it; God helping me, I would do it; and if I heard that a wrong act would apparently bless a whole nation, I would have no right to do wrong on that account.
0.226	No bribe of supposed usefulness should purchase our conscience.
0.227	Right is right, and must always end in blessing; and wrong is wrong, and must always end in a curse, though for a while it may wear the appearance of surpassing good.
0.228	Did not the devil lead our first parents astray by the suggestion that great benefit would arise from their transgression?
0.229	“Your eyes shall be opened, and you shall be like gods,” said the arch-deceiver.
0.230	Would it not be a grand thing for men to grow into gods?
0.231	“Certainly,” says Eve; “I would not lose the opportunity.
0.232	The race which is yet to come would blame me if I did.
0.233	I would not have men remain inferior creatures through my neglect.”
0.234	For the sake of the promised good she ventured upon evil.
0.235	Thousands of people sin because it seems so advantageous, so wise, so necessary, so sure to turn out well.
0.236	Hear what Christ says: “You are my friends if you do whatever I command you.”
0.237	If you do evil that good may come, you cannot walk with him; but if your heart is set on his statutes, you shall find him loving you and taking up his abode with you.
0.238	IV. Fourthly, our text teaches us that THE MOST FRIENDLY ACTION A MAN CAN DO FOR JESUS IS TO OBEY HIM: “You are my friends if you do whatever I command you.”
0.239	Rich men have thought to do the most friendly act possible toward Christ by giving an immense sum to build a church, or to found almshouses or schools.
0.240	If they are believers, and have done this as an act of obedience to Christ’s law of stewardship, they have done well, and the more of such generosity the better; but where splendid gifts are given out of ostentation, or from the idea that some merit will be gained by the consecration of a large amount of wealth, the whole business is unacceptable.
0.241	If a man should give all the substance of his house for love, it would be utterly scorned.
0.242	Jesus asks not for lavish expenditure, but for ourselves.
0.243	He has made this the token of true love: “If you do whatever I command you.”
0.244	“To obey is better than sacrifice, and to heed than the fat of rams.”
0.245	However much we are able to give, we are bound to give it, and should give it cheerfully; but if we suppose that any amount of giving can stand as a substitute for personal obedience, we are greatly mistaken.
0.246	To bring our wealth and not yield our hearts is to give the casket and steal the jewel.
0.247	How dare we bring our sacrifice in a leprous hand?
0.248	We must ourselves be cleansed in the atoning blood before we can be accepted, and our hearts must be changed before our offering can be pure in God’s sight.
0.249	Others have imagined that they could show their friendliness to Christ by some remarkable act of self-mortification.
0.250	Among Romanists, especially in olden times, it was believed that misery and merit went together, and so men tortured themselves so that they might please God.
0.251	They went for many days without washing themselves or their clothes, and imagined that they thus acquired the odor of sanctity.
0.252	I do not believe that Jesus thinks a man is any more his friend because he is dirty.
0.253	Some have put on a hair shirt, or have worn a chain belt which made raw wounds.
0.254	I do not think that the kind Lord Jesus counts these things as friendly acts.
0.255	Ask any humane person whether he would be gratified to know that a friend wore a hair shirt for his sake, and he would answer, “Please let the poor creature wear whatever is most comfortable to him, and that will please me best.”
0.256	The loving Jesus takes no delight in pain and discomfort: the wasting of the body is no doctrine of his.
0.257	John the Baptist might be an ascetic, but Jesus certainly was not: he came eating and drinking, a man among men.
0.258	He did not come to demand the rigors of a hermitage or a monastery; otherwise he would never have been seen at feasts.
0.259	When we hear of the nuns of St. Ann sleeping bolt upright in their coffins, we take no particular satisfaction in their doing so; a kind heart would beg them to go to bed.
0.260	I went over a monastery some time ago, and over each bed was a little cat-o’-nine-tails, which I sincerely hope was used to the satisfaction of its owner; but I did not copy the idea and buy a couple for my sons, nor have I sent one to each of my special friends, for I would never ask them to flog themselves as a proof of friendship.
0.261	Our Lord cannot be gratified by self-inflicted, self-invented tortures.
0.262	These things are will-worship, which is no worship.
0.263	You may fast forty days if you like, but you will gain no merit by it.
0.264	Jesus Christ has not demanded this as the gauge of friendship, nor will he regard us as his friends for this.
0.265	He says, “You are my friends if you do whatever I command you,” but he does not command you to starve, or to wear sackcloth, or to shut yourselves up in a cell: pride invents these things, but grace teaches obedience.
0.266	Certain persons have thought it would be the noblest form of holy service to enter into brotherhoods and sisterhoods.
0.267	They imagined that they would be Christ’s friends indeed if they joined “the Society of Jesus.”
0.268	I have sometimes asked myself whether it might not be well to form a league of Christian men all banded together, to live for Jesus alone, and to give themselves up entirely and wholly to his work; but assuredly the formation of guilds, sisterhoods, or brotherhoods other than the great brotherhood of the church of God is a thing never contemplated in the New Testament: you will find no foreshadowing of Franciscans and Dominicans there.
0.269	All godly women were sisters of mercy, and all Christlike men were of the Society of Jesus, but of monastic and conventual vows we read nothing.
0.270	What is not commanded in Scripture is superstition.
0.271	We are to worship God according to his will, not according to our will; and though I were to consecrate myself entirely to what Papists called the religious life, and get away from the associations of ordinary men, and try to spend my whole time in lonely contemplation, yet there would be nothing in it, because the Lord Jesus never required it at my hands.
0.272	What he does ask for is that we do whatever he commands us.
0.273	Why is it that people try to do something which he never commanded?
0.274	A schoolmaster will allow me to appeal to him on this point.
0.275	If he said to a boy in the school, “Now is the time for you to take your slate and attend to arithmetic,” and the boy instead fetched his copybook, would he not ask whether he had understood him?
0.276	If after a few minutes he finds the boy writing, does he say, “You have written that line very well”?
0.277	Not at all. It matters little whether the writing is well or badly done, for to be writing at all when he was told to be doing sums is a gross act of insubordination.
0.278	So it is with you and me.
0.279	We may do something else, and do it splendidly well, and other people may say, “What a pious man he is!” but if we do not do the Lord’s will, we shall not be his friends.
0.280	We may wear a piece of leather for a sandal, and brown serge for a garment, and swear off boots and coats, but there is no grace in clothing; excellence lies in doing what Christ has commanded.
