0.1	“Forgiving one another, even as God for Christ’s sake has forgiven you.”—Ephesians 4:32.
0.2	The heathen moralists, when they wished to teach virtue, could not point to the example of their gods, for, according to their mythologists, the gods were a compound of every imaginable, and, I might almost say, unimaginable vice.
0.3	Many of the classical deities surpassed the worst of men in their crimes: they were as much greater in wickedness as they were supposed to be superior in power.
0.4	It is a bad day for a people when their gods are worse than they are themselves.
0.5	The blessed purity of our holy faith is conspicuous, not only in its commands, but in the character of the God whom it reveals.
0.6	There is no excellence which we can propose but we can see it shining brightly in the Lord our God; there is no line of conduct in which a believer should excel but we can point to Christ Jesus our Lord and Master as the pattern of it.
0.7	In the highest places of the Christian faith you find the highest virtue, and to God our Father and the Lord Jesus be the highest praise.
0.8	We can urge you to the tenderest spirit of forgiveness by pointing to God, who for Christ’s sake has forgiven you.
0.9	What nobler motive could you require for forgiving one another?
0.10	With such high examples, brothers, what kind of people ought we to be?
0.11	We have sometimes heard of men who were better than their religion, but that is quite impossible with us: we can never, in spirit or in action, rise to the sublime height of our divine religion.
0.12	We should constantly be rising above ourselves, and above the most gracious of our fellow Christians, and yet above us we shall still see our God and Savior.
0.13	We may go from strength to strength in thoughts of goodness and duties of godliness, but Jesus is higher still, and forevermore we must be looking up to him as we climb the sacred hill of grace.
0.14	At this time we wish to speak a little about the duties of love and forgiveness; and here we note at once that the apostle sets before us the example of God himself.
0.15	On that bright example we shall spend most of our time, but I hope not so much as to forget the practical part, which is so much needed in these days by certain unforgiving spirits who nevertheless take the Christian name.
0.16	The theme of God’s forgiving love is so fascinating that we may linger a while, and a long while too, on that bright example of forgiveness which God has set before us; but from it all I hope we shall be gathering grace by which to forgive others even to seventy times seven.
0.17	We shall take the text word by word, and so we shall obtain the clearest divisions.
0.18	I. The first word to think about is “FOR CHRIST’S SAKE.”
0.19	We use these words very often; but probably we have never thought of their force, and even now we cannot bring out the whole of their meaning.
0.20	Let us touch on them thoughtfully, praying the good Spirit to instruct us.
0.21	“For Christ’s sake”: all the good things which God has bestowed on us have come to us “for Christ’s sake,” but especially the forgiveness of our sins has come “for Christ’s sake.”
0.22	This is the plain assertion of the text.
0.23	What does it mean?
0.24	It means, surely, first, for the sake of the great atonement which Christ has offered.
0.25	The great God can, as a just Lawgiver and King, readily pass over our offenses because of the expiation for sin which Christ has offered.
0.26	If sin were merely a personal affront to God, we have abundant evidence that he would be ready enough to pass it by without exacting vengeance; but it is a great deal more than that.
0.27	Those who view it as a mere personal affront against God are only very shallow thinkers.
0.28	Sin is an attack on the moral government of God; it undermines the foundations of society, and if it were permitted to have its way it would reduce everything to anarchy, and even destroy the governing power and the Ruler himself.
0.29	God has a great realm to govern, not merely of men who dwell on the face of the earth, but under his rule there are angels, and principalities, and powers, and we do not know how many worlds of intelligent beings.
0.30	It would certainly be a monstrous thing to suppose that God has made those myriads of worlds that we see sparkling in the sky at night without having placed some living creatures in them; it is far more reasonable to suppose that this earth is an altogether insignificant speck in the divine dominion, a mere province in the boundless empire of the King of kings.
0.31	Now, since this world has rebelled against God as defiantly as it has, unless satisfaction were demanded for its rebellion, it would be a tolerated assault on the dominion of the great Judge of all, and a lowering of his royal influence over all his domain.
0.32	If sin in man’s case were left unpunished, it would soon be known through myriads of worlds, and in fact by ten thousand times ten thousand races of creatures, that they might sin without punishment; if one race had done so, why not all the rest?
0.33	This would be a proclamation of universal license to rebel.
0.34	It would probably be the worst calamity that could happen—that any sin should go unpunished by the supreme Judge.
0.35	Sometimes in a state, unless the lawgiver carries out the law against the murderer, life will be in danger and everything will become insecure; and therefore it becomes mercy to sign the death warrant: so it is with God in reference to this world of sinners.
0.36	It is his very love, as well as his holiness and his justice, which, if I may use such a term, compels him to severity of judgment, so that sin cannot and must not be blotted out until atonement has been presented.
0.37	There must first of all be a sacrifice for sin, which, mark you, the great Father, to show his love, supplies himself; for it is his own Son who is given to die, and so the Father himself supplies the ransom through his Son, that Son being also one with himself by bonds of essential unity, mysterious but most intense.
0.38	If God demands the penalty in justice, he himself supplies it in love. It is a wondrous mystery, this mystery of the way of salvation by an atoning sacrifice; but this much is clear, that now God for Christ’s sake has forgiven us, because satisfaction has been made to the injured honor of the divine government, and justice is satisfied.
0.39	I want you to consider for a moment how readily God may now blot out sin, since Christ has died.
0.40	The blotting out of sin seems hard until we see the cross, and then it appears easy enough.
0.41	I have looked at sin until it seemed to blind me with its horror, and I said to myself, “This damned spot can never be washed out; no launderer’s soap can change its color; sooner might the Ethiopian change his skin or the leopard his spots.
0.42	O sin, you deep, eternal evil, what can remove you?”
0.43	And then I have seen the Son of God dying on the cross, and read the anguish of his soul, and heard the cries which showed the torment of his spirit when God his Father had forsaken him, and it has seemed to me as if the blotting out of sin were the easiest thing under heaven.
0.44	When I have seen Jesus die, I have not been able to understand how any sin could be difficult to remove.
0.45	Let a man stand on Calvary and look on him whom he has pierced, and believe and accept the atonement made, and it becomes the simplest thing possible that his debt should be discharged now that it is paid, that his freedom should be given now that the ransom is found, and that he should be no longer under condemnation, since the guilt that condemned him has been carried away by his great Substitute and Lord.
0.46	It is, then, because of what Jesus Christ has suffered in our place that God for Christ’s sake has forgiven us.
0.47	The second rendering of the text would be this: that God has forgiven us because of the representative character of Christ.
0.48	It should never be forgotten that we originally fell by a representative.
0.49	Adam stood for us, and he was our federal head.
0.50	We did not fall personally at the first, but in our representative.
0.51	Had he kept the conditions of the covenant, we would have stood through him; but, since he fell, we fell in him.
0.52	I beg you, do not find fault with the arrangement, because there lay the hope of our race.
0.53	The angels probably fell individually, one by one, and so they fell beyond recovery—there was no restoring them; but as we fell in one Adam, there remained the possibility of our rising in another Adam; and therefore in the fullness of time God sent forth his Son Jesus Christ, born of a woman, made subject to the law, to become the second Adam.
0.54	He undertook to remove our burdens and to fulfill the conditions of our restoration.
0.55	According to the covenant he must appear in our nature, and in the fullness of time he took that nature on himself.
0.56	He must bear the penalty: that he has done in his personal suffering and death.
0.57	He must obey the law: that he has done to the utmost.
0.58	And now Christ Jesus, having borne the penalty and fulfilled the law, is himself justified before God, and stands forth before God as the representative of all who are in him.
0.59	God for Christ’s sake has accepted us in him, has forgiven us in him, and looks on us with love infinite and unchanging in him.
0.60	This is how all our blessings come to us—in and through Christ Jesus; and if we are indeed in him, the Lord not only forgives us our sin, but he bestows on us the boundless riches of his grace in him: in fact, he treats us as he would treat his Son; he deals with us as he would deal with Jesus.
0.61	Oh, how pleasant to think that when the just God looks on us it is through the reconciling medium; he views us through the Mediator.
0.62	We sometimes sing a hymn which says—
0.63	“Him and then the sinner see, / Look through Jesus’ wounds on me,”
0.64	and this is just what the Lord does.
0.65	He counts us just for the sake of our Savior’s atonement, and because of his representative character.
0.66	Now go a little further.
0.67	When we read “for Christ’s sake,” it surely means for the sake of the deep love which the Father bears him.
0.68	My brothers, can you guess a little of the love which the Father has toward the Only Begotten?
0.69	We cannot pry into the wondrous mystery of the eternal sonship of the Son of God, lest we be blinded by excess of light; but this we know, that they are one God—Father, Son, and Holy Spirit; and the union which exists between them is intense beyond conception.
0.70	“The Father loves the Son” was always true, and is true now; but how deeply, how intensely he loves the Son no mind can conceive.
0.71	Now, brothers, the Lord will do great things for the sake of a Son whom he loves as he loves Jesus; for in addition to the fact of his eternally loving him, as being one with him by nature and essence, there is now the added cause of love arising out of what the Lord Jesus has done as the servant of the Father.
0.72	Remember that our Lord Jesus has been obedient to his Father’s will—obedient to death, even to death on the cross; for which reason God has highly exalted him and given him a name above every name.
0.73	One of the sweetest thoughts to my mind, which I sometimes suck the sweetness from when I am alone, is this—that God the Father will do anything for Christ.
0.74	Here is also another piece of honeycomb—when I can plead Christ’s name, I am sure to win my plea with him.
0.75	“For Christ’s sake” is a plea that always touches the heart of the great God.
0.76	Show that your receiving such and such a blessing will glorify Christ, and the Father cannot withhold it, for it is his delight to honor Jesus.
0.77	We speak in human terms, of course, and on such a theme as this we must be careful; but still we can only speak as men, being only men.
0.78	It is the joy of the Father to express his love to his Son.
0.79	Throughout all ages they have had fellowship with one another: they have always been one in all their designs; they have never differed on any point, and cannot differ; and you notice that when our Lord says, “Father, glorify your Son,” he is so knit with the Father that he adds, “so that your Son also may glorify you.”
0.80	Their mutual love is inconceivably great, and therefore, brothers, God will do anything for Jesus.
0.81	God will forgive us for Christ’s sake; yes, he has done so in the case of thousands around me.
0.82	And you, great sinner, black with sin, if you will go to God at this moment and say, “Lord, I cannot ask you to forgive me for my own sake, but do it out of love for your dear Son,” he will do it, for he will do anything for the sake of Jesus.
0.83	If you are at this time so conscious of sin as to despair of yourself, it is well that you should be so, for self-despair is only common sense, since there is nothing in yourself on which you can rely.
0.84	But do catch hold of this hope—it is not a straw, it is a good, solid life buoy—if you can ask forgiveness for the sake of Jesus, God will do anything for Jesus, and he will do anything for you for his dear sake.
0.85	So we read our text once more in the light of a truth which grows out of the love of God; namely, that God forgives sin for the sake of glorifying Christ.
0.86	Christ bore the shame that he might magnify his Father, and now his Father delights to magnify him by blotting out the sin.
0.87	If you can prove that any gift to you would reflect glory on Christ, you may depend on it: you will have it.
0.88	If there is anything under heaven that would make Christ more illustrious, the Father would not withhold it for a moment.
0.89	If you see that for you to have your sin forgiven would raise the fame of the Savior, go and plead that argument with God, and you shall surely prevail.
0.90	Will it not make Christ glad if he saves such a sinner as you are?
0.91	Then go with this argument in your mouth: “Father, glorify your Son by exalting him as a glorious Savior in saving me.”
0.92	I often find this a great lever when the load will not budge—to say to the Lord, “Lord, you know the straits I am in; you know how undeserving I am; you know what a poor, ruined creature I am before you; but if your dear Son helps and saves me, the very angels will stand and wonder at his mighty grace, and so it will bring glory to him; therefore I entreat you, be gracious to me.”
0.93	Be sure that you are certain to prevail if you can plead that it will glorify Christ; and surely you would not wish to have a thing that would not glorify him.
0.94	Your prayer shall always prevail if your heart is in such a state that you are willing to have or not to have, according as it will honor your Lord: if it will not glorify Christ, be more than content to do without the choicest earthly good; but be doubly grateful when the gift that is granted tends to bring honor to the ever dear and worshipful name of Jesus.
0.95	“For Christ’s sake.” It is a precious word; dwell on it, and store this sentence in the archives of your memory—the Father will do anything for the sake of Jesus Christ his Son.
0.96	II. Now, secondly, we pass on to observe what it is that the text tells us has been done for us, and to us, for Christ’s sake.
0.97	“God for Christ’s sake HAS FORGIVEN YOU.”
0.98	First notice that he has done this certainly.
0.99	The apostle does not say he hopes so, but he says, “God for Christ’s sake has forgiven you.”
0.100	Are you among the number of the forgiven, my dear hearer?
0.101	Have you believed in the Lord Jesus Christ?
0.102	Then, as surely as you have believed, God for Christ’s sake has forgiven you.
0.103	Have you put your trust in the atoning sacrifice?
0.104	Then God for Christ’s sake has forgiven you.
0.105	You have not begun to be a Christian, I hope, with the idea that one day, at some future time, you may obtain forgiveness.
0.106	No. “God for Christ’s sake has forgiven you.”
0.107	Pardon is not a prize to be run for, but a blessing received at the first step of the race.
0.108	If you have believed in Jesus, your sin has all gone—all gone; all your sin has been erased from the records of the past, never to be mentioned against you forever.
0.109	The moment a sinner looks to Christ, the burden of his sin rolls off his shoulders, never to return.
0.110	If Christ has washed you (and he has, if you have believed in him), then you are clean in every part, and before the Lord you stand delivered from every trace of guilt.
0.111	Pardon is not a matter of hope, but a matter of fact.
0.112	Expectation looks for many a blessing, but pardon is a realized favor which faith holds in her hand even now.
0.113	If Christ took your load, your load cannot remain on your own back: if Christ paid your debts, then they do not stand against you in God’s books.
0.114	How can they? It stands to reason that if your Substitute has taken your sin and put it away, your sin no longer lies on you.
0.115	God for Christ’s sake has forgiven you.
0.116	Get hold of that grand truth, and hold it, though all the devils in hell roar at you.
0.117	Grasp it as with a hand of steel; grip it as for your life: “God for Christ’s sake has forgiven me”—may each one of us be able to say that.
0.118	We shall not feel the divine sweetness and force of the text unless we can make it a personal matter by the Holy Spirit.
0.119	Then notice that God has forgiven us continuously.
0.120	He not only forgave us all our sins at the first, but he continues daily to forgive, for the act of forgiveness is a continuous one.
0.121	I have sometimes heard it said that we were so forgiven when we first believed that there is no need to ask for further forgiveness; to which I reply—we were so completely forgiven when we first believed that we ought continually to ask for the continuance of that one far-reaching act, that the Lord may continue to exercise toward us that fullness of forgiving grace which absolved us perfectly at the first, so that we may continue to walk before him with a sense of that complete forgiveness, clear and unquestioned.
0.122	I know I was forgiven when I first believed in Christ; and I am equally sure of it now: the one absolution continues to ring in my ears like joy bells which never cease.
0.123	Pardon once given continues to be given.
0.124	When through doubt and anxiety I was not sure of my pardon, it was still true; for the one who believes in him is not condemned, even though he may write bitter things against himself.
0.125	Beloved friend, catch hold of that, and do not let it go.
0.126	Divine pardon is a continuous act.
0.127	And this forgiveness on God’s part was most free.
0.128	We did nothing to obtain it by merit, and we brought nothing with which to purchase it.
0.129	He forgave us for Christ’s sake, not for anything that we had done.
0.130	True, we did repent, and did believe; but repentance and faith he gave us, so that he did not forgive us for the sake of them, but purely out of his own dear love, because he delights in mercy, and is never more like himself than when he passes over transgression, iniquity, and sin.
0.131	Remember, also, that he forgave us fully.
0.132	It was not a sin here and there that he blotted out, but the whole horrible list and catalog of our offenses he destroyed at once.
0.133	The substitution of our Lord has settled that matter even to perfection:—
0.134	“Because the sinless Savior died, / My sinful soul is counted free; / For God, the Just, is satisfied / To look on him and pardon me.”
0.135	All our transgressions are swept away at once, carried off as by a flood, and so completely removed from us that no guilty trace of them remains.
0.136	They are all gone!
0.137	O you believers, think of this, for the “all” is no little thing: sins against a holy God, sins against his loving Son, sins against the gospel as well as against the law, sins against man as well as against God, sins of the body as well as sins of the mind, sins as numerous as the sands on the seashore, and as great as the sea itself: all, all are removed from us as far as the east is from the west.
0.138	All this evil was rolled into one great mass and laid on Jesus, and having borne it all, he has made an end of it forever.
0.139	When the Lord forgave us, he forgave us the whole debt.
0.140	He did not take the bill and say, “I strike out this item and that,” but the pen went through it all—PAID.
0.141	It was a receipt in full for all demands. Jesus took the handwritten record which was against us and nailed it to his cross, to show before the entire universe that its power to condemn us had ceased forever.
0.142	We have in him a full forgiveness.
0.143	And let it be remembered that this forgiveness which God has given us for Christ’s sake is an eternal forgiveness.
0.144	He will never rake up our past offenses and charge them to us a second time.
0.145	He will not find us on an evil day and say, “I have had great patience with you, but now I will deal with you according to your sins.”
0.146	Far otherwise: whoever believes in Jesus has everlasting life, and shall never come into condemnation.
0.147	The pardon of heaven is irreversible.
0.148	“The gifts and calling of God are never repented of.”
0.149	He never repents of what he has given, or forgiven. It is done, it is done forever: Jehovah absolves, and the sentence stands fast forever.
0.150	“There is therefore now no condemnation to them who are in Christ Jesus.”
0.151	“Who will lay any charge against God’s elect?
0.152	God is the one who justifies.
0.153	Who is he that condemns?”
0.154	Blessed be God for eternal pardon!
0.155	And since I could not find any word to finish with but this one, I will use it: he has divinely pardoned us.
0.156	There is such truth, reality, and emphasis in the pardon of God as you can never find in the pardon of man; for though a man should forgive all you have done against him, if you have treated him very badly, it is more than you could expect that he should entirely forget it; but the Lord says, “Their sins and iniquities I will remember no more forever.”
0.157	If a man has betrayed you, although you have forgiven him, you are not likely to trust him again.
0.158	It is an old proverb, “Never ride a broken-kneed horse,” and it is not a bad proverb either.
0.159	But see how the Lord deals with his people.
0.160	When Peter was set on his feet again, he was a broken-kneed horse, sure enough, and yet see how gloriously the Lord rode that charger on the day of Pentecost.
0.161	Did he not go out conquering and to conquer?
0.162	The Lord lets bygones be bygones so completely that he trusts pardoned souls with his secrets, for “the Lord’s secret is with those who fear him”; and he entrusts some of us with his choicest treasures, for Paul said, “He has entrusted me with the gospel, though I was a blasphemer.”
0.163	He commits to our keeping that priceless casket which holds the best hope of men, namely, the gospel of Jesus.
0.164	“We have this treasure in vessels of earth.”
0.165	This shows how perfect our forgiveness is—no, I must put it this way: how divine is the forgiveness which we have received.
0.166	Let us rejoice in that grand promise which comes to us by the mouth of Jeremiah of old: “In those days, and at that time, says the Lord, the iniquity of Israel shall be searched for, and there shall be none; and the sins of Judah, and they shall not be found: for I will pardon those whom I reserve.”
0.167	Here is annihilation—the only annihilation I know of—the absolute annihilation of sin through the pardon which the Lord gives to his people.
0.168	Let us sing it as though it were a choice hymn: “The iniquity of Israel shall be searched for, and there shall be none.”
0.169	III. Now, if you have drunk in the spirit of our subject, you will be strengthened to bear what I have to say to you on a point of practice.
0.170	“FORGIVING ONE ANOTHER, even as God for Christ’s sake has forgiven you.”
0.171	Let me say at the beginning that I do not know of anyone here present who has fallen out with anybody else, and therefore I shall make no personal allusions.
0.172	If I did know of quarrels and bickering, it is very likely that I should say much the same; but I do not happen to know of any; and if, therefore, my remarks should strike home, I would earnestly beg each one so affected to believe that what I say is intended for him, and to receive it as a pointed, personal message from God.
0.173	“Forgiving one another, even as God for Christ’s sake has forgiven you.”
0.174	Now observe how the apostle puts it.
0.175	Does he say “forgiving another”?
0.176	No, that is not the text, if you look at it.
0.177	It is “forgiving one another.”
0.178	One another! Ah, then that means that if you have to forgive today, it is very likely that you will yourself need to be forgiven tomorrow, for it is “forgiving one another.”
0.179	It is turn and turn about, a mutual operation, a cooperative service.
0.180	In fact, it is a joint-stock business of mutual forgiveness, and members of Christian churches should take large shares in this concern.
0.181	“Forgiving one another.” You forgive me, and I forgive you, and we forgive them, and they forgive us, and so a circle of unlimited forbearance and love goes around the world.
0.182	There is something wrong about me that needs to be forgiven by my brother, but there is also something wrong about my brother which needs to be forgiven by me; and this is what the apostle means—that all of us are mutually to be practicing the sacred art and mystery of forgiving one another.
0.183	If we always did this, we would not put up with those who have a special gift for spying out faults.
0.184	There are some who, whatever church they are in, always bring a bad report of it.
0.185	I have heard this sort of thing from many—“There is no love among Christians at all.”
0.186	I will tell you the character of the gentleman who makes that remark: he is both unloving and unlovely, and so he is off the track of the pilgrims of love.
0.187	Another cries, “There is no sincerity in the world now.”
0.188	That man is a hypocrite: be quite sure of that.
0.189	Judge a bird by its song, and a man by what he says.
0.190	The censorious measure our grain, but they use their own bushels.
0.191	You may know very well what a man is by what he says of others.
0.192	It is a gauge of character which will very seldom deceive you: judge other men by their own judgment of their fellows.
0.193	Their speech betrays their heart.
0.194	Show me your tongue, sir!
0.195	Now I know whether you are sick or well.
0.196	He who speaks with an evil tongue of his neighbor has an evil heart; rest assured of that.
0.197	Let us begin our Christian career with the full assurance that we shall have a great deal to forgive in other people, but that there will be a great deal more to be forgiven in ourselves; and let us count on having to exercise gentleness, and on needing its exercise from others: “Forgiving one another, even as God for Christ’s sake has forgiven you.”
0.198	Note again: when we forgive, it is a poor and humble business compared with God’s forgiving us, because we are only forgiving one another, that is, forgiving fellow servants; whereas when God forgives us, it is the Judge of all the earth forgiving, not his equals, but his rebel subjects, guilty of treason against his majesty.
0.199	For God to forgive is something great; for us to forgive, though some think it great, should be regarded as a very small matter.
0.200	Then reflect on the matter to be forgiven.
0.201	Our Lord in his parable tells us that the fellow servant owed a few pence, but the servant himself was debtor to his master for many talents.
0.202	What we owe to God is infinite, but what our fellow creature owes to us is a very small sum.
0.203	What did he do that has so offended you?
0.204	“He said a very shameful thing about me.”
0.205	It was very bad of him, no doubt.
0.206	“Then he played a very nasty trick on me, and acted very ungraciously; in fact, he behaved scandalously, and if you hear the story you will be quite indignant.”
0.207	Well, I am indignant.
0.208	He is a bad fellow, there is no doubt about it; and so are you.
0.209	So you certainly were when you first came to God; bad as he is to you, you have been much worse to the Lord.
0.210	I will guarantee that his black deeds toward you are white compared with your black deeds in the presence of God.
0.211	“Oh, but you would not believe how basely he acted.”
0.212	No, and I dare say I should hardly believe it if I heard how base you have been to the Lord; at any rate, it should make our eyes fill with tears to think how we have grieved our God and vexed his Spirit.
0.213	Some of us have had so much manifest forgiveness, so much outward sin forgiven, that for us to forgive ought to be as natural as opening our hands.
0.214	After such forgiveness as the Lord has bestowed on some of us, we would be wicked servants indeed if we were to take our brother by the throat and say, “Pay me what you owe me.”
0.215	We would deserve to be handed over to the tormentors by our angry Master if we did not count it joy to pass over a brother’s fault.
0.216	If anyone here who is a Christian finds forgiveness difficult, I am going to give him three words which will help him wonderfully.
0.217	I would put them into the good man’s mouth.
0.218	I gave them to you just now, and begged you to get the sweetness of them; here they are again!
0.219	“For Christ’s sake.”
0.220	Can you not forgive an offender on that ground?
0.221	Ah, the girl has acted very shamefully, and you, her father, have said some strong things; but I beg you to forgive her for Christ’s sake.
0.222	Can you not do it with that motive?
0.223	It is true your son has behaved very wrongly, and nothing hurts a father’s heart more than the wicked conduct of a son.
0.224	You did, in a fit of anger, say a very stern thing, and bar him from your house forever.
0.225	I entreat you to eat your words for Christ’s sake.
0.226	Sometimes when I have been pleading a case like that, the person I have been persuading has kindly said, “I will do it for you, sir.”
0.227	I have said, “I will thank you if you will do it at all, but I would rather you had said you would do it for my Master, for what a blessed Master he has been to you!
0.228	Do it for his sake.”
0.229	I may be bringing this home very plainly to some of you.
0.230	I hope I am.
0.231	If there are any of you who have got into a bad state of heart and have said you will never forgive a rebellious son, do not say so again until you have looked at the matter, for Christ’s sake.
0.232	Not for the boy’s sake, not for the sake of your neighbor who has offended you, not for any other reason do I urge you to mercy, but for Christ’s sake.
0.233	Come, you two brothers who have fallen out, love each other for Christ’s sake; come, you two sisters; come, you two friends who have been estranged, get together at once, and end all your ill feeling for Christ’s sake.
0.234	You must not keep a drop of malice in your soul, for Christ’s sake.
0.235	Oh, charming word, how it melts us, and as it melts, it seems to leave no trace of anger behind it: for Christ’s sake our love suffers long and never fails.
0.236	I do not know how to put this next word I am going to say.
0.237	It is a paradox.
0.238	You must forgive or you cannot be saved; at the same time you must not do it under compulsion; you must do it freely.
0.239	There is a way of carrying this into practice, though I cannot explain it in words.
0.240	You must forgive, not because you are forced to, but because you do it heartily.
0.241	Remember, it is of no use for you to put your money into that offering box as you go out unless you remember first to forgive your brother.
0.242	God will not accept the gifts, prayers, or praises of an unrelenting heart.
0.243	Though you leave all your possessions to his cause, he will not accept a penny of it if you die in an unforgiving temper.
0.244	There is no grace where there is no willingness to overlook faults.
0.245	John says, “If a man does not love his brother, whom he has seen, how can he love God, whom he has not seen?”
0.246	The very prayer that teaches you to ask for mercy bids you say, “Forgive us, as we forgive our debtors.”
0.247	Unless you have forgiven others, you read your own death warrant when you repeat the Lord’s Prayer.
0.248	Finally, I want to say to you all, brothers, that, as brothers and sisters in Christ Jesus, if we are to forgive one another, there are some other things which we ought to do.
0.249	And the first is, let us not provoke each other to offend.
0.250	If I know that a man does not like a certain thing, I will not thrust it in his way.
0.251	Do not say, “Well, but if he is short-tempered, I cannot help it; he should not be so ready to take offense.
0.252	I cannot always be deferring to his absurd sensitiveness.”
0.253	No; but, brother, your friend is very ready to take offense, and you know that he is; have regard, then, for his weakness of temper, as you would if he were afflicted in body.
0.254	If you have rheumatism or gout, your friends do not go stamping across the room and saying, “He ought not to mind that; he ought not to feel it.”
0.255	Kind-hearted people step across the floor lightly, for fear they should hurt the poor suffering limb.
0.256	If a man has a diseased mind and is very irritable, treat him gently, pity his weakness, and do not irritate him.
0.257	A friend wrote me a letter a short while ago with a serious complaint against a brother who had been very angry with him, and had spoken very sharply while roused to passion.
0.258	I felt bound to hear the other side of the story, and I was obliged to say, “Now, you two brothers are both wrong.
0.259	You, my brother, lost your temper; but you, my other brother, irritated him, so that I do not wonder he lost his temper.
0.260	And when you saw he had lost his temper, why did you not go away, or do something to calm him?
0.261	No, but you stayed to increase the wrath, and then wrote to expose him.”
0.262	I blame the wood for burning, but what shall I say of the bellows?
0.263	It was wrong to blaze, but was it right to fan the flame?
0.264	Very often when a man is angry, he may not be the only one to blame.
0.265	Therefore, brothers and sisters, if we are to forgive each other, let us not provoke each other to offend.
0.266	In the next place, do not manufacture offenses.
0.267	Many times a man has been offended at another for no reason at all.
0.268	One person has said of another as he passed him in the street, “He will not even nod to me.
0.269	He is too proud to acknowledge me, because I am a poor man.”
0.270	Now, that beloved friend who was thus blamed could not see much further than his hand, for he was nearsighted.
0.271	Another has been criticized for not hearing, though he was deaf, and another for not shaking hands when his arm was crippled.
0.272	Do not imagine offenses where they are not intended.
