0.1	“We love him, because he first loved us.” — 1 John 4:19
0.2	During the last two Sabbaths I have been preaching the gospel to the unconverted.
0.3	I have earnestly urged the very chief of sinners to look to Jesus Christ, and have assured them that as a preparation for coming to Christ they need no good works or good dispositions, but that they may come, just as they are, to the foot of the cross, and receive the pardoning blood and all-sufficient merits of the Lord Jesus Christ.
0.4	The thought has since occurred to me that some who were ignorant of the gospel might perhaps raise this question: Is this likely to promote morality?
0.5	If the gospel is a proclamation of pardon to the very chief of sinners, will this not be a license to sin?
0.6	In what respects can the gospel be said to be a gospel according to holiness?
0.7	How will such preaching work?
0.8	Will it make men better?
0.9	Will they be more attentive to the laws that govern the dealings between man and man?
0.10	Will they be more obedient to the statutes that govern the dealings between man and God?
0.11	I thought, therefore, that we would go a step further and try to show this morning how the proclamation of the gospel of God, though at the beginning it addresses itself to men who are utterly destitute of any good, is nevertheless designed to lead these very men to the noblest heights of virtue, yes, to ultimate perfection in holiness.
0.12	The text tells us that the effect of the gospel, when it is received in the heart, is that it compels and constrains such a heart to love God.
0.13	“We love him, because he first loved us.”
0.14	When the gospel comes to us, it does not find us loving God, and it does not expect anything of us; but coming with the divine application of the Holy Spirit, it simply assures us that God loves us, however deeply we may be immersed in sin; and then the aftereffect of this proclamation of love is that “we love him because he first loved us.”
0.15	Can you imagine a being placed halfway between this world and heaven?
0.16	Can you conceive of him as having such enlarged capacities that he could easily discern what was done in heaven and what was done on earth?
0.17	I can imagine that, before the Fall, if there had been such a being, he would have been struck by the remarkable harmony that existed between God’s great world, called heaven, and the little world, the earth.
0.18	Whenever the chimes of heaven rang, the great note of those massive bells was love; and when the little bells of earth were sounded and the harmonies of this narrow sphere rang out their note, it was just the same—love.
0.19	When the bright spirits gathered around the great throne of God in heaven to magnify the Lord, at the same time the world could be seen, clothed in its priestly garments, offering its sacrifice of purest praise.
0.20	When the cherubim and seraphim continually cried, “Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of armies,” a note was heard, feebler perhaps, but just as sweetly musical, coming up from paradise: “Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of armies.”
0.21	There was no jarring, no discord; the thunder peals of heaven’s melodies were exactly in accord with the whispers of earth’s harmonies.
0.22	There was “glory to God in the highest,” and on earth there was glory too; the heart of man was as the heart of God; God loved man, and man loved God.
0.23	But imagine that same great Spirit still standing between the heavens and the earth—how sad he must be when he hears the jarring discord and feels it grate upon his ear!
0.24	The Lord says, “I am reconciled to you; I have put away your sin”; but what is the answer of this earth?
0.25	The answer of the world is, “Man is at enmity with God: God may be reconciled, but man is not.
0.26	The mass of men are still enemies to God by wicked works.”
0.27	When the angels praise God, if they listen to the sounds that are to be heard on earth, they hear the trumpet of cruel war; they hear the bacchanalian shout and the song of the lascivious; and what a discord is this in the great harmony of the spheres!
0.28	The fact is this: the world was originally one great string in the harp of the universe, and when the Almighty swept that harp with his gracious fingers, nothing was to be heard but praise; now that string is snapped, and where it has been reset by grace, it is still not wholly restored to its perfect tune, and the note that comes from it has but little sweetness and very much discord.
0.29	But, O bright Spirit, keep your place, and live on.
0.30	The day is hastening on glowing wheels, and its axle is hot with speed.
0.31	The day is coming when this world shall be a paradise again.
0.32	Jesus Christ, who came the first time to bleed and suffer so that he might wash the world from its iniquity, is coming a second time to reign and conquer so that he may clothe the earth with glory; and the day shall come when you, O Spirit, shall hear again the everlasting harmony.
0.33	Once more the bells of earth shall be tuned to the melodies of heaven; once more the eternal chorus shall find that no singer is absent, but that the music is complete.
0.34	But how is this to be?
0.35	How is the world to be brought back?
0.36	How is it to be restored?
0.37	We answer: the reason there was this original harmony between earth and heaven was that there was love between the two of them, and our great reason for hoping that an undiscordant harmony between heaven and earth shall at last be re-established is simply this: that God has already shown his love toward us, and that in return hearts touched by his grace even now love him; and when they are multiplied and love is re-established, then the harmony shall be complete.
0.38	Having thus introduced my text, I must now plunge into it.
0.39	We shall notice the parentage, the nourishment, and the walk of love; and we shall exhort all believers present here to love God, because he has first loved them.
0.40	I. In the first place, THE PARENTAGE OF TRUE LOVE TO GOD.
0.41	There is no light in the planet but what comes from the sun; there is no light in the moon but what is borrowed; and there is no true love in the heart but what comes from God.
0.42	Love is the light, the life, and the way of the universe.
0.43	Now, God is both life, and light, and way, and, to crown all, God is love.
0.44	From this overflowing fountain of the infinite love of God all our love to God must spring.
0.45	This must always be a great and certain truth: that we love him for no other reason than because he first loved us.
0.46	There are some who think that God might be loved through simple contemplation of his works.
0.47	We do not believe it.
0.48	We have heard a great deal about admiring philosophers, and we have felt that admiration was more than possible when studying the works of God.
0.49	We have heard a great deal about wondering discoverers, and we have acknowledged that the mind must be base indeed which does not wonder when it looks upon the works of God; and we have sometimes heard about a love to God that has been engendered by the beauties of scenery, but we have never believed in its existence.
0.50	We do believe that where love is already born in the heart of man, all the wonders of God’s providence and creation may stir that love again, since it is there already; but we do not and cannot believe, because we have never seen such an instance, that the mere contemplation of God’s works could ever raise any man to the height of love.
0.51	In fact, the great problem has been tried, and it has been solved in the negative.
0.52	What does the poet say?
0.53	“What though the spicy breezes blow soft over Java’s isle; / Where every prospect pleases, and only man is vile.”
0.54	Where God is most resplendent in his works and most lavish in his gifts, there man has been the vilest and God the most forgotten.
0.55	Others have taught—if not exactly in their doctrine, yet their doctrine necessarily leads to it—that human nature may of itself attain to love for God.
0.56	Our simple reply is that we have never met with such an instance.
0.57	We have closely questioned the people of God, and we believe that others have questioned them in every age, but we have never had more than one answer to this question: “Why have you loved God?”
0.58	The only answer has been, “Because he first loved me.”
0.59	I have heard men preach about free will, but I have never yet heard of a Christian who exalted free will in his own experience.
0.60	I have heard men say that men of their own free will may turn to God, believe, repent, and love; but I have heard the same persons, when talking of their own experience, say that they did not turn to God in that way, but that Jesus sought them when they were strangers, wandering from the fold of God.
0.61	The whole matter may look plausible enough when it is preached, but when it is felt it is found to be a phantom.
0.62	It may seem right enough for a man to tell his fellow that his own free will may save him; but when he comes to close dealing with his own conscience, he himself, however wild his doctrine, is compelled to say, “Oh, yes, I do love Jesus, because he first loved me.”
0.63	I have wondered at a Wesleyan brother who has sometimes railed against this doctrine in the pulpit and then has given out this very hymn, and all the members of the church have joined in singing it most heartily, while at the same time they were tolling the death knell of their own peculiar tenets; for if that hymn is true, Arminianism must be false.
0.64	If it is the certain fact that the only reason for our loving God is that his love has been poured out in our hearts, then it cannot be true in any way that man ever did or ever will love God until, first of all, God has shown his love toward him.
0.65	But without disputing any longer, do we not all admit that our love to God is the sweet offspring of God’s love to us?
0.66	Ah, beloved, every man may have cold admiration; but the warmth of love can only be kindled by the fires of God’s Spirit.
0.67	Let each Christian speak for himself; we shall all hold this great and cardinal truth, that the reason for our love to God is the sweet influence of his grace.
0.68	Sometimes I wonder that such as we should have been brought to love God at all.
0.69	Is our love so precious that God should court it, dressed in the crimson robes of a dying Redeemer?
0.70	If we had loved God, it would have been no more than he deserved.
0.71	But when we rebelled, and yet he sought our love, it was surprising indeed.
0.72	It was a wonder when he stripped himself of all his splendors, came down, and wrapped himself in a mantle of clay; but I think the wonder is surpassed still, for after he had died for us, we still did not love him; we rebelled against him; we rejected the proclamation of the gospel; we resisted his Spirit; but he said, “I will have their hearts”; and he followed us day after day, hour after hour.
0.73	Sometimes he laid us low, and he said, “Surely they will love me if I restore them!”
0.74	At another time he filled us with grain and with wine, and he said, “Surely they will love me now”; but we still revolted, still rebelled.
0.75	At last he said, “I will strive no longer; I am Almighty, and I will not allow a human heart to be stronger than I am.
0.76	I turn the will of man as the rivers of water are turned”; and behold, he put forth his strength, and in an instant the current changed, and we loved him, because we could then see the love of God in that he sent his Son to be our Redeemer.
0.77	But we must confess, beloved, going back to the truth with which we started, that we should never have had any love toward God unless that love had been sown in us by the sweet seed of his love to us.
0.78	If there is anyone here who has a love to Christ, let him differ from this doctrine here, but let him know that he shall not differ hereafter; for in heaven they all sing praise to free grace.
0.79	They all sing, “Salvation to our God and to the Lamb.”
0.80	II. Love, then, has for its parent the love of God poured out in our hearts.
0.81	But after it is divinely born in our heart, it must be divinely NOURISHED.
0.82	Love is an exotic; it is not a plant that will flourish naturally in human soil.
0.83	Love to God is a rich and rare thing; it would die if it were left to be frostbitten by the chilly blasts of our selfishness, and if it received no nourishment but what can be drawn from the rock of our own hard hearts, it must perish.
0.84	As love comes from heaven, so it must feed on heavenly bread.
0.85	It cannot exist in this wilderness unless it is nurtured from above and fed with manna from on high.
0.86	On what, then, does love feed?
0.87	Why, it feeds on love.
0.88	What brought it forth becomes its food.
0.89	“We love him because he first loved us.”
0.90	The constant motive and sustaining power of our love to God is his love to us.
0.91	And here let me remark that there are different kinds of food in this great granary of love.
0.92	When we are first renewed, the only food on which we can live is milk, because we are only babes and do not yet have strength to feed on higher truths.
0.93	The first thing, then, that our love feeds on while it is still an infant is a sense of favors received.
0.94	Ask a young Christian why he loves Christ, and he will tell you, “I love Christ because he has bought me with his blood!”
0.95	“Why do you love God the Father?”
0.96	“I love God the Father because he gave his Son for me.”
0.97	“And why do you love God the Spirit?”
0.98	“I love him because he has renewed my heart.”
0.99	That is to say, we love God for what he has given to us.
0.100	Our first love feeds simply on the plain food of a grateful remembrance of mercies received.
0.101	And note well: however much we grow in grace, this will always make up a great part of the food of our love.
0.102	But when the Christian grows older and has more grace, he loves Christ for another reason.
0.103	He loves Christ because he feels that Christ deserves to be loved.
0.104	I trust I can say that I now have in my heart a love to God altogether apart from the matter of my personal salvation.
0.105	I feel that even now I must love him, for his character is so unspeakably lovely.
0.106	His love to other people seems so great a thought that, altogether apart from my own interest in it, I trust I can say that I love Christ, and have seen something of Christ in his offices, and something of the rapturous beauties of his complex person.
0.107	I feel as if I could come to his feet and say, “Sweet Lord, I loved you first because of your gifts to me; but now, the look of your eyes—you have enraptured my spirit with the glories of your person; and now I love you, not merely because I have eaten of your bread and you have supplied my wants, but I love you for what you are.” But note, at the same time we must always mingle this with the old motive.
0.108	We must still feel that we begin with that first stepping-stone, loving Christ because of his mercies, and that although we have climbed higher and have come to love him with a love that is superior to that in its motive, we still carry the old motive with us.
0.109	We love him because of his kindness toward us.
0.110	Why, I do think it is possible for a man, filled with the love of Christ in his heart and girded by divine grace, to soar to such a degree of love to Christ that, if you could hear him speak, you would sit and wonder, as though an angel were speaking to you.
0.111	Have you ever read the divine letter of Rutherford?
0.112	I do think that if there remains among men a remnant of the ancient inspiration that guided the pen of Solomon, it rested upon the head of Rutherford.
0.113	If you read the sonnets of sweet George Herbert—oh, how sweetly he sings of his Master!
0.114	If any of the heavenly harps were left on earth by accident, George Herbert found one, and he touched the living strings with such divine excellence of judgment that he made every string find out his Master.
0.115	These men did not love Christ merely because of what he had done for them; but you will find in their sonnets and in their letters that their motive of love was that he had communed with them; he had shown them his hands and his side; they had walked with him in the villages; they had lain with him on the beds of spices; they had entered into the mystic circle of communion; and they felt that they loved Christ because he was glorious all over, and was so divinely fair that if all nations could behold him, surely they must be constrained to love him too.
0.116	This, then, is the food of love; but when love grows rich—and it sometimes does—the most loving heart grows cold toward Christ.
0.117	Do you know that the only food that ever suits sick love is the food on which it fed at first?
0.118	I have heard physicians say that if a man is sick, there is no place so well suited to him as the place where he was born; and if love grows sick and cold, there is no place so fit for it to go to as the place where it was born, namely, the love of God in Christ Jesus our Lord.
0.119	Where was love born?
0.120	Was she born in the midst of romantic scenery, and was she nursed with wondrous contemplations on the lap of beauty?
0.121	Ah, no. Was she born on the steeps of Sinai, when God came from Sinai and the Holy One from Mount Paran, and melted the mountains with the touch of his foot, and made the rocks flow down like wax before his terrible presence?
0.122	Ah, no. Was love born on Tabor, when the Savior was transfigured and his garment became whiter than wool, whiter than any launderer could make it?
0.123	Ah, no; darkness rushed over the sight of those who looked upon him then, and they fell asleep, for the glory overpowered them.
0.124	Let me tell you where love was born.
0.125	Love was born in the garden of Gethsemane, where Jesus sweat great drops of blood; it was nurtured in Pilate’s hall, where Jesus bared his back to the plowing of the lash and gave his body to be spit upon and scourged.
0.126	Love was nurtured at the cross, amid the groans of a dying God, beneath the droppings of his blood—it was there that love was nurtured.
0.127	Bear me witness, children of God.
0.128	Where did your love spring from, if not from the foot of the cross?
0.129	Have you ever seen that sweet flower growing anywhere but at the foot of Calvary?
0.130	No; it was when you saw “love divine, all loves excelling,” outdoing itself; it was when you saw love in bondage to itself, dying by its own stroke, laying down its life though it had power to keep it and to take it up again—it was there your love was born; and if you wish your love, when it is sick, to be recovered, take it to some of those sweet places; make it sit in the shade of the olive trees, and make it stand on the pavement and gaze while the blood is still gushing down.
0.131	Take it to the cross, and bid it look and see afresh the bleeding Lamb; and surely this shall make your love spring from a dwarf into a giant, and this shall fan it from a spark into a flame.
0.132	And then, when your love is thus replenished, let me urge you to give your love full exercise; for it shall grow by it.
0.133	You say, “Where shall I exercise the contemplation of my love, to make it grow?”
0.134	Oh, Sacred Dove of love, stretch your wings, and play the eagle now.
0.135	Come! Open wide your eyes, and look full into the Sun’s face, and soar upward, upward, upward, far above the heights of this world’s creation—upward, till you are lost in eternity.
0.136	Remember that God loved you from before the foundation of the world.
0.137	Does this not strengthen your love?
0.138	Ah, what a bracing air is that air of eternity!
0.139	When I fly into it for a moment and think of the great doctrine of election—of
0.140	“That vast unmeasured love, / Which from the days of old, / Did all the chosen seed embrace, / Like sheep within the fold.”
0.141	It makes the tears run down one’s cheeks to think that we should have an interest in that decree and council of the Almighty Three, when everyone who was to be blood-bought had his name inscribed in God’s eternal book.
0.142	Come, soul, I bid you now exercise your wings a little, and see whether this does not make you love God.
0.143	He thought of you before you had a being.
0.144	When as yet the sun and the moon were not—when the sun, the moon, and the stars slept in the mind of God like unborn forests in an acorn cup, when the old sea was not yet born, long before this infant world lay in its swaddling bands of mist—then God had inscribed your name indelibly upon the heart and upon the hands of Christ, to remain forever.
0.145	And does this not make you love God?
0.146	Is this not sweet exercise for your love?
0.147	For it is here that my text comes in, giving, as it were, the last charge in this sweet battle of love, a charge that sweeps everything before it.
0.148	“We love God, because he first loved us,” seeing that he loved us before time began, when in eternity he dwelt alone.
0.149	And when you have soared backward into the past eternity, I have yet another flight for you.
0.150	Soar back through all your own experience, and think of the way in which the Lord your God has led you in the wilderness, and how he has fed and clothed you every day—how he has borne with your bad manners—how he has put up with all your murmurings and all your longings after the fleshpots of Egypt—how he has opened the rock to supply you, and fed you with manna that came down from heaven.
0.151	Think of how his grace has been sufficient for you in all your troubles—how his blood has been a pardon to you in all your sins—how his rod and his staff have comforted you.
0.152	And when you have flown over this sweet field of love, you may fly further on and remember that the oath, the covenant, and the blood have something more in them than the past; for though “he first loved us,” this does not mean that he shall ever cease to love, for he is Alpha and he shall be Omega, he is first and he shall be last; and therefore consider that when you pass through the valley of the shadow of death, you need fear no evil, for he is with you.
0.153	When you stand in the cold floods of Jordan, you need not fear, for death cannot separate you from his love; and when you come into the mysteries of eternity, you need not tremble, for “I am persuaded that neither principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor anything else that is created shall be able to separate us from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.”
0.154	And now, soul, is your love not refreshed?
0.155	Does this not make you love him?
0.156	Does not a flight over those boundless plains of the ether of love inflame your heart and compel you to delight yourself in the Lord your God?
0.157	Here is the food of love.
0.158	“We love him, because he first loved us,” and because in that first love there is the pledge and promise that he will love us even to the end.
0.159	III. And now comes the third point, the WALK OF LOVE.
0.160	“We love him.” Children of God, if Christ were here on earth, what would you do for him?
0.161	If it were rumored tomorrow that the Son of Man had come down from heaven, as he came at first, what would you do for him?
0.162	If there were an infallible witness that the feet that trod the holy acres of Palestine were actually treading the roads of Great Britain, what would you do for him?
0.163	Oh, I can imagine that there would be a tumult of delighted hearts—an overflowing of generous hands—that there would be a sea of streaming eyes to behold him.
0.164	“Do for him!” says one; “Do for him!
0.165	If he were hungry, I would give him food, though it were my last crust.
0.166	If he were thirsty, I would give him drink, though my own lips were parched with fire.
0.167	If he were naked, I would strip myself and shiver in the cold to clothe him.
0.168	Do for him! I should hardly know what to do.
0.169	I would hurry away, and I would cast myself at his dear feet, and I would beg him, if it would only honor him, to tread upon me and crush me in the dust, if he would only be raised one inch higher by it.
0.170	If he wanted a soldier, I would enlist in his army; if he needed someone to die, I would give my body to be burned, if he stood by to see the sacrifice and cheer me in the flames.”
0.171	O you daughters of Jerusalem! Would you not go out to meet him? Would you not rejoice with the tambourine and in the dance?
0.172	Then you might dance, like Miriam, beside Egypt’s waters, red with blood.
0.173	We, the sons of men, would dance like David before the ark, exulting for joy, if Christ had come.
0.174	Ah, we think we love him so much that we would do all that; but there is a grave question about the truth of this matter after all.
0.175	Do you not know that Christ’s wife and family are here?
0.176	And if you love him, would it not follow as a natural inference that you would love his bride and his offspring?
0.177	“Ah!” says one, “Christ has no bride on earth.”
0.178	Has he not? Has he not betrothed his church to himself?
0.179	Is not his church, the mother of the faithful, his own chosen wife?
0.180	And did he not give his blood to be her dowry?
0.181	And has he not declared that he will never be divorced from her, for he hates divorce, and that he will consummate the marriage on the last great day, when he shall come to reign with his people upon the earth.
0.182	And has he no children here?
0.183	“The daughters of Jerusalem and the sons of Zion—who has begotten these for me?”
0.184	Are they not the offspring of the everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace, the child born, the son given?
0.185	Surely they are; and if we love Christ, as we think we do, as we profess we do, we shall love his church and people.
0.186	And do you love his church?
0.187	Perhaps you love the part to which you belong.
0.188	You love the hand.
0.189	It may be a hand that is adorned with many a brilliant ring of noble ceremonies, and you love that.
0.190	You may belong to some poor, poverty-stricken denomination—it may be the foot—and you love the foot; but you speak contemptuously of the hand, because it is adorned with greater honors.
0.191	Meanwhile, perhaps you of the hand are speaking lightly of those who are of the foot.
0.192	Brethren, it is a common thing with us all to love only a part of Christ’s body and not to love the whole; but if we love him, we should love all his people.
0.193	When we are on our knees in prayer, I fear that when we are praying for the church we do not mean all that we say.
0.194	We are praying for our church, our section of it.
0.195	Now, he who loves Christ, if he is a Baptist, loves the doctrine of baptism because he knows it to be scriptural; but at the same time, wherever he sees the grace of God in any man’s heart, he loves him because he is a part of the living church, and he does not withhold his heart, his hand, or his house from him because he happens to differ on some one point.
0.196	I pray that the church in these days may have a more loving spirit toward herself.
0.197	We ought to delight in the advance of every denomination.
0.198	Is the Church of England rousing from its sleep?
0.199	Is she springing like a phoenix from her ashes?
0.200	God be with her, and God bless her!
0.201	Is another denomination leading the way, and seeking by its ministers to draw the wanderer into the house of God?
0.202	God be with it!
0.203	Is the Primitive Methodist laboring in the hedge and ditch, toiling for his Master?
0.204	God help him! Is the Calvinist seeking to uphold Christ crucified in all his splendors?
0.205	God be with him!
0.206	And does another man with far less knowledge preach much error, but still hold that “by grace you are saved through faith”? Then God bless him, and may success be with him forevermore.
0.207	If you loved Christ better, you would love all Christ’s church and all Christ’s people.
0.208	Do you not know that Christ now has a mouth on earth, and has left a hand on earth and a foot on earth still, and that if you would prove your love to him, you need not think that you cannot feed him—you need not imagine that you cannot fill his hand, or that you cannot wash his feet?
0.209	You can do all this today.
0.210	He has left his poor and afflicted people, and their mouths are hungry, for they need bread, and their tongues are parched, for they need water.
0.211	You meet them; they come to you; they are destitute and afflicted.
0.212	Do you refuse them?
0.213	Do you know who it was you turned away at your door?
0.214	“Inasmuch as you failed to do it for one of the least of these, my brethren, you failed to do it for me.”
0.215	In rejecting the petition of the poor when you might have helped them, you rejected Christ.
0.216	Christ was in effect the man to whom you stingily refused the needed alms, and your Savior was thus rejected at the door of one for whom he himself had died.
0.217	Do you want to feed Christ?
0.218	Open your eyes, then, and you shall see him everywhere: in our back streets, in our lanes, in our alleys, in all our churches, connected with every branch of Christ’s people, you shall find the poor and the afflicted.
0.219	If you want to feed Christ, feed them.
0.220	But you say that you are willing to wash Christ’s feet. Ah, well, and you may do it.
0.221	Has he no fallen children?
0.222	Are there no brethren who have sinned, and who are thus defiled?
0.223	If Christ’s feet were soiled, you say you would wash them; then if a Christian man has stepped aside, seek to restore him, and lead him once more in the way of righteousness.
0.224	And do you want to fill Christ’s hands with your generosity?
0.225	His church is the treasure-house of his alms, and the hand of his church is outstretched for help, for she always needs it.
0.226	She has a work to do which must be accomplished.
0.227	She is hard-pressed because your help is withheld from her; pour your gifts into her treasury, for all that you can give to her is given to the Lord Jesus Christ.
0.228	Finally, to stimulate your love, let me remind you that Christ Jesus had two trials of his love, which he endured with firmness, but which are often too much for us.
0.229	When Christ was high and glorious, I marvel that he loved us.
0.230	I have known many a man who loved his friend while he was in the same low estate; but he has risen, and he has disdained to know the man at whose table he had fed.
0.231	A lofty elevation tests the love which we bear to those who are beneath us in rank.
0.232	Now, Christ Jesus, the Lord of heaven and the King of angels, condescended to notice us before he came to earth, and always called us brethren; and since he has ascended into heaven, has resumed the diadem, and once more sits down at the right hand of God, he has never forgotten us.
0.233	His high estate has never made him slight a disciple.
0.234	When he rode into Jerusalem in triumph, we do not read that he disdained to confess that the humble fishermen were his followers.
0.235	And “now, though he reigns exalted high, his love is still as great”; still he calls us brethren, friends; still he recognizes the kinship of the one blood.
0.236	And yet, strange to say, we have known many Christians who have forgotten much of their love to Christ when they have risen in the world.
0.237	“Ah!” said a woman who had been accustomed to do much for Christ in her poverty, and who had been left a great sum, “I cannot do as much as I used to do.”
0.238	“But how is that?” said someone.
0.239	She said, “When I had a shilling purse, I had a guinea heart; and now that I have a guinea purse, I have only a shilling heart.”
0.240	It is a sad temptation to some men to get rich.
0.241	They were content to go to the meetinghouse and mix with the humble congregation while they had but little; they have grown rich, there is a Turkey carpet in the drawing room, they now have arrangements too splendid to permit them to invite the poor of the flock, as they once did, and Christ Jesus is not so fashionable as to allow them to introduce any religious topic when they meet with their new friends.
0.242	Besides this, they say they are now obliged to pay this visit and that visit, and they must spend so much time on their attire and on maintaining their station and respectability that they cannot find time to pray as they did.
0.243	The house of God has to be neglected for the party, and Christ has less of their heart than he ever had.
0.244	“Is this your kindness to your friend?”
0.245	And have you risen so high that you are ashamed of Christ? And have you grown so rich that Christ in his poverty is despised?
0.246	Alas, poor wealth! Alas, base wealth! Vile wealth!
0.247	It would be well for you if it were all swept away, if a descent into poverty would be a restoration to the ardor of your affection.
