0.1	“There is a friend that sticks closer than a brother.”—Proverbs 18:24.
0.2	Cicero has rightly said, “Friendship is the only thing in the world about whose usefulness all mankind agrees.”
0.3	Friendship seems as necessary an element of a comfortable existence in this world as fire or water, or even air itself.
0.4	A man may drag out a miserable existence in proud, solitary dignity, but his life is scarcely life; it is nothing but an existence, the tree of life being stripped of the leaves of hope and the fruits of joy.
0.5	He who would be happy here must have friends; and he who would be happy hereafter must, above all things, find a friend in the world to come, in the person of God, the Father of his people.
0.6	Friendship, however, though very pleasing and exceedingly blessed, has brought men the greatest misery when it has been unworthy and unfaithful; for just in proportion as a good friend is sweet, a false friend is full of bitterness.
0.7	“A faithless friend is sharper than a viper’s tooth.”
0.8	It is sweet to rest on someone; but oh, how bitter to have that support snap, and to suffer a grievous fall as the result of your confidence!
0.9	Faithfulness is an absolute necessity in a true friend; we cannot rejoice in people unless they will stand faithful to us.
0.10	Solomon declares that “there is a friend that sticks closer than a brother.”
0.11	That friend, I suppose, he never found in the pomp and vanities of the world.
0.12	He had tried them all, but he found them empty; he passed through all their joys, but he found them “vanity of vanities.”
0.13	Poor Savage spoke from sad experience when he said—
0.14	“You will find the friendship of the world a show! / Mere outward show! It is like the harlot’s tears, / The statesman’s promise, or the false patriot’s zeal, / Full of fair seeming, but delusion all.”
0.15	And so, for the most part, they are.
0.16	The world’s friendship is always brittle.
0.17	Trust in it, and you have trusted a robber; rely on it, and you have leaned on a thorn; yes, worse than that, on a spear that will pierce you to the soul with agony.
0.18	Yet Solomon says he had found “a friend that sticks closer than a brother.”
0.19	Not in the haunts of his unbridled pleasures, nor in the wanderings of his unlimited resources, but in the pavilion of the Most High, the secret dwelling place of God, in the person of Jesus, the Son of God, the Friend of sinners.
0.20	It is saying a great thing to affirm that “there is a friend that sticks closer than a brother”; for the love of brothers has produced most valiant deeds.
0.21	We have read stories of what brotherhood could do which, we think, could hardly be surpassed in the records of friendship.
0.22	Timoleon, with his shield, stood over the body of his slain brother, to defend him from the insults of the enemy.
0.23	It was counted a brave deed of brotherhood that he should dare the spears of an army in defense of his brother’s corpse.
0.24	And there have been many such instances, in ancient and modern warfare, of the devotion of brothers to one another.
0.25	There is a story told of a Highland regiment that lost its way while marching through the Highlands; they were overtaken by one of those terrible storms that sometimes come upon travelers unawares, and, blinded by the snow, they lost their way on the mountains.
0.26	Nearly frozen to death, they could continue their march only with difficulty.
0.27	One man after another dropped into the snow and disappeared.
0.28	There were two brothers, however, by the name of Forsythe; one of them fell flat on the ground and would have lain there to die, but his brother, though barely able to drag his own limbs across the white desert, took him on his back and carried him along; and as others fell one by one, this brave, true-hearted brother carried his loved one on his back, until at last he himself fell down, overcome with fatigue, and died.
0.29	His brother, however, had received such warmth from his body that he was able to reach the end of his journey in safety, and so lived.
0.30	Here we have an example of one brother sacrificing his life for another.
0.31	I hope there are some brothers here who would be prepared to do the same if they should ever be brought into the same difficulty.
0.32	It is saying a great thing to declare that “there is a friend that sticks closer than a brother.”
0.33	It is putting that friend first of all in the list of loving ones; for surely, next to a mother’s love, there is, and there ought to be, no higher affection in the world than the love of a brother for one born of the same father and dandled on the same knee.
0.34	Those who have “grown in beauty side by side, and filled one house with glee,” ought to love one another.
0.35	And we think there have been many glorious examples and mighty proofs of the love of brothers.
0.36	Yet, says Solomon, “there is a friend that sticks closer than a brother.”
0.37	To repeat our assertion, we believe that this friend is the blessed Redeemer, Jesus Christ.
0.38	It will be our task this morning, first, to prove the fact that he sticks closer than a brother; then, as briefly as we can, to show you why he sticks closer than a brother; and then to finish by giving you some lessons that may be drawn from the doctrine that Jesus Christ is a faithful Friend.
0.39	I. First, then, beloved, we assert that CHRIST IS “A FRIEND THAT STICKS CLOSER THAN A BROTHER.”
0.40	And in order to prove this from facts, we appeal to those of you who have had him for a friend.
0.41	Will not each of you at once give your verdict that this is neither more nor less than an unexaggerated truth?
0.42	He loved you before all worlds; long before the morning star flung its ray across the darkness, before the wing of an angel had beaten the uncharted heavens, before anything of creation had struggled from the womb of nothingness, God, even our God, had set his heart on all his children.
0.43	Since that time, has he once swerved, has he once turned aside, once changed?
0.44	No; you who have tasted his love and know his grace will bear me witness that he has been a certain friend in uncertain circumstances.
0.45	“He near your side has always stood. / His loving-kindness, oh, how good!”
0.46	You fell in Adam; did he stop loving you?
0.47	No; he became the second Adam to redeem you.
0.48	You sinned in practice and brought upon your head the condemnation of God; you deserved his wrath and his utter anger; did he forsake you then? No!
0.49	“He saw you ruined in the fall, / Yet loved you in spite of all.”
0.50	He sent his minister after you; you despised him; he preached the gospel in your ears; you laughed at him; you broke God’s Sabbath; you despised his Word.
0.51	Did he forsake you then? No!
0.52	“Determined to save, he watched over your path, / While, Satan’s blind slave, you played with death.”
0.53	And at last he arrested you by his grace; he humbled you, he made you penitent, he brought you to his feet, and he forgave you all your sins.
0.54	Since then, has he left you?
0.55	You have often left him; has he ever left you?
0.56	You have had many trials and troubles; has he ever deserted you?
0.57	Has he ever turned away his heart and shut up his tender compassion?
0.58	No, children of God, it is your solemn duty to say “No,” and to bear witness to his faithfulness.
0.59	You have been in severe afflictions and in dangerous circumstances; did your friend desert you then?
0.60	Others have been faithless to you; the one who eats bread with you has raised his heel against you; but has Christ ever forsaken you?
0.61	Has there ever been a moment when you could go to him and say, “Master, you have betrayed me”?
0.62	Could you once, in the blackest hour of your grief, dare to call his faithfulness into question?
0.63	Could you dare to say of him, “Lord, you promised what you did not perform”?
0.64	Will you not bear witness now, “Not one good thing has failed of all that the Lord God has promised; all has come to pass”?
0.65	And do you fear he will yet forsake you?
0.66	Ask, then, the bright ones before the throne—“You glorified spirits!
0.67	Did Christ forsake you?
0.68	You have passed through Jordan’s stream; did he leave you there?
0.69	You have been baptized in the black flood of death; did he forsake you there?
0.70	You have stood before the throne of God; did he deny you then?”
0.71	And they answered, “No; through all the troubles of our life, in all the bitterness of death, in all the agonies of our dying moments, and in all the terrors of God’s judgment, he has been with us, ‘a friend that sticks closer than a brother.’”
0.72	Out of all the millions of God’s redeemed, there is not one he has forsaken.
0.73	Poor they have been, lowly and distressed, but he has never despised their prayer, never turned aside from doing them good.
0.74	He has always been with them.
0.75	“For his mercy will endure, / Ever faithful, ever sure.”
0.76	But I will not linger any longer, since I cannot prove this to the ungodly, and to the godly it is already proven, for they know it by experience; therefore there is little need for me to do more than simply certify the fact that Christ is a faithful friend—a friend in every hour of need and every time of distress.
H:0.16	II. And now I have to tell you THE REASONS WHY WE MAY DEPEND ON CHRIST AS A FAITHFUL FRIEND.
0.77	There are some things in himself which make it certain that he will stick close to his people.
0.78	1. True friendship can only be formed between true men.
0.79	Hearts are the soul of honor.
0.80	There can be no lasting friendship between bad men.
0.81	Bad men may pretend to love each other, but their friendship is a rope of sand, which will be broken at any convenient moment; but if a man has a sincere heart within him, and is true and noble, then we may confide in him.
0.82	Spenser sings in fine old English verse—
0.83	“No, surely that friendship cannot long endure, / However bright and goodly be its style, / That serves an evil cause or an evil end, / For Virtue is the band that binds hearts most sure.”
0.84	But who can find a stain in the character of Jesus, or who can tarnish his honor?
0.85	Has there ever been a spot on his coat of arms?
0.86	Has his flag ever been trampled in the dust?
0.87	Does he not stand as the true witness in heaven, the faithful and just?
0.88	Is it not declared of him that he is God, who cannot lie?
0.89	Have we not found him so up to this moment; and may we not, knowing that he is “Holy, holy, holy Lord,” trust him to stick closer to us than a brother?
0.90	His goodness is the guarantee of his faithfulness; he cannot fail us.
0.91	2. Faithfulness to us about our faults is a certain sign of fidelity in a friend.
0.92	You may depend on the man who will tell you of your faults in a kind and considerate manner.
0.93	Fawning hypocrites and insidious flatterers are the sweepings and refuse of friendship.
0.94	They are nothing but parasites on that noble tree.
0.95	But true friends trust you enough to tell you openly of your faults.
0.96	Give me for a friend the man who will speak honestly of me to my face; who will not tell first one neighbor and then another, but who will come straight to my house and say, “Sir, I feel there is such-and-such a thing in you, which, as my brother, I must tell you about.”
0.97	That man is a true friend; he has proved himself to be so; for we never get any praise for telling people of their faults; we rather risk their dislike; a man will sometimes thank you for it, but he does not often like you any the better.
0.98	Praise is a thing we all love.
0.99	I met a man the other day who said he was impervious to flattery; I was walking with him at the time, and turning around rather sharply, I said, “At any rate, sir, you seem to have a great gift for flattering yourself, for you are really doing so in saying you are impervious to flattery.”
0.100	“You cannot flatter me,” he said.
0.101	I replied, “I can, if I care to try; and perhaps I may do so before the day is out.”
0.102	I found I could not flatter him directly, so I began by saying what a fine child that was of his; and he drank it in like a precious draught; and when I praised this thing and that thing belonging to him, I could see that he was very easily flattered—not directly, but indirectly.
0.103	We are all open to flattery; we like the soothing cordial, only it must not be labeled flattery; for we have a religious horror of flattery if it is called by that name; call it by any other name, and we drink it in, even as the ox drinks in water.
0.104	Now, child of God, has Christ ever flattered you?
0.105	Has he not told you of your faults quite truly?
0.106	Has he not pricked your conscience even about what you thought to gloss over—your little secret sins?
0.107	Has he not stirred your conscience to thunder notes of terror in your ears because of your misdeeds?
0.108	Well, then, you may trust him, for he shows that faithfulness which makes a man truly trustworthy.
0.109	Thus I have pointed out to you that there are reasons in himself for which we may trust him.
0.110	3. In the next place, there are some things in his friendship which make us sure of not being deceived when we put our confidence in him.
0.111	True friendship must not be of hasty growth.
0.112	As quaint old Master Fuller says: “Let friendship creep gently to a height; if it rushes to it, it may soon run itself out of breath.”
0.113	It is even so.
0.114	I think it was Joanna Baillie who said—
0.115	“Friendship is no plant of hasty growth. / Though planted in esteem’s deep, settled soil, / The gradual tending of kind fellowship / Must bring it to perfection.”
0.116	In vain you trust the gourd over your head, O Jonah; it will not be of much use to you; it came up in a night, it may wither in a night.
0.117	It is the strong, stiff oak, of ages’ growth, that will withstand the tempest; that will both put out its wings to shield you from the sun and afterward find you a shelter in its heart, if necessary, in its gray old age, when its branches tremble in the blast.
0.118	Friendship is true when it begins; but we must have a man’s friendship for a long time before we can say of him that he will stick closer than a brother.
0.119	And how long has Christ loved you?
0.120	That you cannot tell.
0.121	When the ages were not yet born, he loved you; when this world was an infant, wrapped in swaddling clothes of mist, he loved you; when the old pyramids had not yet begun to be built, his heart was set on you; and ever since you were born he has had a strong affection for you.
0.122	He looked on you in your cradle, and he loved you then; he was betrothed to you when you were an infant only a span long, and he has loved you ever since.
0.123	Some of you I see with gray hair, some with heads quite bald with age; he has loved you until now, and will he now forsake you?
0.124	Oh no! His friendship is so old that it must last; it has been matured by so many tempests, it has been rooted by so many winds of trouble, that it cannot but endure; it must stand.
0.125	Even as the granite peak of the mountain will not be melted, because, unlike the snow, it has braved the blast and borne the heat of the burning sun; it has always stood out, catching in its face every blow from the face of nature, and yet has remained unmoved and unharmed.
0.126	It will last, for it has lasted.
0.127	But when the elements melt and run away in a stream of dissolving fire, then Christ’s friendship will still exist, for it is of older growth than they.
0.128	He must be “a friend that sticks closer than a brother”; for his friendship is a hoary friendship—as white with age as his own head, of which it is said, “His head and his hair are white like snow, as white as wool.”
0.129	4. But note, further, that the friendship which will last does not arise in the chambers of mirth, nor is it fed and fattened there.
0.130	Young lady, you speak of a dear friend whom you made last night in a ballroom.
0.131	Do not, I beg you, misuse the word; he is not a friend if he was gained merely there; friends are better things than those that grow in the hothouse of pleasure.
0.132	Friendship is a more lasting plant than those.
0.133	You have a friend, have you?
0.134	Yes; and he keeps a pair of horses and has a fine household.
0.135	Ah! but your best way to prove your friend is to know that he will be your friend when you have not so much as a humble cottage, and when, homeless and without clothing, you are driven to beg your bread.
0.136	That is how you would truly test a friend.
0.137	Give me a friend who was born in the wintertime, whose cradle was rocked in the storm; he will last.
0.138	Our fair-weather friends will flee away from us.
0.139	I would rather have a robin for a friend than a swallow; for a swallow stays with us only in the summertime, but a robin comes to us in the winter.
0.140	Those are fast friends who come nearest to us when we are in the greatest distress; but those are not friends who hurry away when hard times come.
0.141	Believer, have you reason to fear that Christ will leave you now?
0.142	Has he not been with you in the house of mourning?
0.143	You found your friend where men find pearls, “in caverns deep, where darkness dwells”; you found Jesus in your hour of trouble.
0.144	It was on the bed of sickness that you first learned the value of his name; it was in the hour of mental anguish that you first laid hold of the hem of his garment; and since then, your nearest and sweetest fellowship with him has been in the hours of darkness.
0.145	Well, then, such a friend, proved in the house of sorrow—a friend who gave his heart’s blood for you and let his soul pour out in one great river of blood—such a friend never can and never will forsake you; he sticks closer than a brother.
0.146	5. Again, a friend who is gained by folly is never a lasting friend.
0.147	Do a foolish thing and so make a man your friend; it is only a partnership in vice, and you will soon discover that his friendship is worthless; the friendship you gain by doing wrong you had better be without.
0.148	Oh, how many silly friendships spring up, the mere fruit of sentimentalism, having no root at all, but like the plant our Savior tells us of: “It sprang up because it had no depth of soil.”
0.149	Jesus Christ’s friendship is not like that; there is no ingredient of folly in it; he loves us wisely, not winking at or conniving at our follies, but instilling his wisdom into us.
0.150	His love is wise; he has chosen us according to the counsel of his wisdom—not blindly and rashly, but with all judgment and prudence.
0.151	Under this head I may also observe that the friendship of ignorance is not a very desirable one.
0.152	I want no man to call himself my friend if he does not know me.
0.153	Let him love me in proportion to his knowledge of me.
0.154	If he loves me for the little he knows, when he knows more he may cast me aside.
0.155	“That man,” says one, “seems to be a very amiable man.”
0.156	“I am sure I can love him,” says another, as he studies his features.
0.157	Yes, but do not write “friend” yet; wait a little while, until you know more of him; just see him, examine him, try him, test him, and not until then enter him on the sacred list of friends.
0.158	Be friendly to all, but make none your friends until they know you and you know them.
0.159	Many a friendship born in the darkness of ignorance has died suddenly in the light of a better acquaintance with each other.
0.160	You supposed people to be different from what they were, and when you discovered their real character you disregarded them.
0.161	I remember someone saying to me, “I have great affection for you, sir,” and he mentioned a certain reason.
0.162	I replied, “My dear fellow, your reason is absolutely false; the very thing you love me for, I am not, and I hope I never shall be.”
0.163	And so I said, “I really cannot accept your friendship if it is founded on a misunderstanding of what I may have said.”
0.164	But our Lord Jesus can never forsake those whom he once loves, because he can discover nothing in us worse than he knew, for he knew all about us beforehand.
0.165	He saw our leprosy, and yet he loved us; he knew our deceitfulness and unbelief, and yet he pressed us to his bosom; he knew what poor fools we were, and yet he said he would never leave us nor forsake us.
0.166	He knew that we would rebel against him and despise his counsel many times; he knew that even when we loved him our love would be cold and listless, but he loved for his own sake.
0.167	Surely, then, he will stick closer than a brother.
0.168	6. Yet again, friendship and love, to be real, must not lie in words, but in deeds.
0.169	The friendship of mere compliment is the fashion of this age, because this age is the age of deceit.
0.170	The world is the great house of sham.
0.171	Go where you may in London, sham stares you in the face; there are very few real things to be found.
0.172	I do not refer merely to tricks in business, adulterations in food, and suchlike.
0.173	Deception is not confined to the tradesman’s shop.
0.174	It prevails throughout society; the sanctuary is not exempt.
0.175	The preacher adopts a sham voice.
0.176	You hardly ever hear a man speak in the pulpit the same way he would speak in the parlor.
0.177	Why, I sometimes hear my brothers, when they are at tea or dinner, speak in a very comfortable, decent sort of English voice; but when they get into their pulpits they adopt a sanctimonious tone and fill their mouths with inflated speech, or else whine most pitifully.
0.178	They degrade the pulpit by pretending to honor it, speaking in a voice which God never intended any mortal to have.
0.179	This is the great house of sham; and such little things show which way the wind blows.
0.180	You leave your card at a friend’s house; that is an act of friendship—the card!
0.181	I wonder whether, if he were short of cash, you would leave your bankbook!
0.182	You write “My dear sir,” “Yours very truly”; it is a sham; you do not mean it.
0.183	“Dear!” That is a sacred word; it ought to be used for none but those you regard with affection; but we tolerate falsehoods now as if they were truths, and we call them courtesies.
0.184	Courtesies they may be; but untruths they are in many cases.
0.185	Now, Christ’s love lies not in words, but in deeds.
0.186	He does not say, “My dear people”; but he let his heart out, and we could see what that was.
0.187	He does not come to us and simply say, “Dearly beloved”; but he hangs on the cross, and there we read “Dearly beloved” in red letters.
0.188	He does not come to us with the kisses of his lips first—he gives us blessings with both his hands; he gives himself for us, and then he gives himself to us.
0.189	Trust no complimentary friend; rely on the man who gives you real tokens worth having, who does deeds for you that show the truthfulness of his heart.
0.190	Such a friend—and such is Jesus—“sticks closer than a brother.”
0.191	7. Once more, and I shall not weary you, I trust.
0.192	A purchased friend will never last long.
0.193	Give to a man nineteen times and refuse him the twentieth, and he will hate you; for his love sprang only from your gifts.
0.194	The love which I could buy for gold I would sell for dross; the friendship that I could buy for pearls I would give up for pebbles; it would be of no value, and therefore the sooner lost the better.
0.195	But oh, believer, Christ’s love was unpurchased love.
0.196	You brought him no present.
0.197	Jacob said, when his sons went to Egypt, “Take the man a present: a little oil, a little balm, a few nuts and almonds”; but you took Christ no presents.
0.198	When you came to him you said,
0.199	“Nothing in my hands I bring, / Simply to your cross I cling.”
0.200	You did not even promise that you would love him; for you had such a faithless heart that you dared not say so.
0.201	You asked him to make you love him; that was the most you could do.
0.202	He loved you for nothing at all—simply because he would love you.
0.203	Well, that love which lived like this on nothing but its own resources will not starve through the scantiness of your returns; the love which grew in such a rocky heart as this will not die for lack of soil.
0.204	That love which sprang up in the barren desert, in your unwatered soul, will never, never die for lack of moisture; it must live; it cannot expire.
0.205	Jesus must be “a friend that sticks closer than a brother.”
0.206	8. Shall I stop to urge more reasons?
0.207	I may only mention one other, namely this—that no cause can by any possibility arise which could make Christ love us less.
0.208	You say, how is this?
0.209	One man loves his friend, but he suddenly grows rich, and now he says, I am a greater man than I used to be; I forget my old acquaintances.
0.210	But Christ can grow no richer; he is as rich as he can be, infinitely so.
0.211	He loves you now; then it cannot be possible that he will forsake you because of an increase in his own personal glory, for everlasting glories now crown his head; he can never be more glorious and great, and therefore he will love you still.
0.212	Sometimes, on the other hand, one friend grows poorer, and then the other forsakes him; but you never can grow poorer than you are, for you are “a poor sinner and nothing at all” now; you have nothing of your own; all you have is borrowed, all given you by him.
0.213	He cannot love you less, then, because you grow poorer; for poverty that has nothing is at least as poor as it can be, and can never sink lower on the scale.
0.214	Christ, therefore, must love you despite all your nakedness and all your poverty.
0.215	“But I may prove sinful,” you say.
0.216	Yes, but you cannot be more so than he foreknew you would be; and yet he loved you with the foreknowledge of all your sins.
0.217	Surely, then, when it happens it will cause him no surprise; he knew it all beforehand, and he cannot swerve from his love; no circumstance can possibly arise that will ever divide the Savior from his love to his people, or the saint from his love to his Savior.
0.218	He is “a friend that sticks closer than a brother.”
0.219	III. Now, then, AN INFERENCE TO BE DRAWN FROM THIS.
0.220	Lavater says, “The qualities of your friends will be those of your enemies: cold friends, cold enemies; half friends, half enemies; fervent enemies, warm friends.”
0.221	Knowing this to be true, I have often congratulated myself when my enemies have spoken fiercely against me.
0.222	Well, I have thought, “My friends love me hard and fast; let my enemies be as hot as they please; it only indicates that my friends are proportionately firm in affection.”
0.223	Then we draw this inference: that if Christ sticks close, and he is our friend, then our enemies will stick close, and never leave us till we die.
0.224	O Christian, because Christ sticks close, the devil will stick close too; he will be at you and with you; the dog of hell will never cease his howling until you reach the other side of Jordan; no place in this world is out of bowshot of that great enemy; until you have crossed the stream his arrows can reach you, and they will.
0.225	If Christ gave himself for you, the devil will do all he can to destroy you; if Christ has been long-suffering toward you, Satan will be persevering, in hopes that Christ may forget you; he will strive after you, and strive until he sees you safely landed in heaven.
0.226	But do not be disappointed: the louder Satan roars, the more proof you will have of Christ’s love.
0.227	“Give me,” said old Rutherford, “give me a roaring devil rather than a sleeping one; for sleeping devils make me slumber, but roaring ones drive me to run to my Master.”
0.228	Oh, be glad, then, if the world rants at you, if your foes attack you fiercely.
0.229	Christ is just as full of love toward you as they are of hatred. Therefore,
0.230	“Be firm and strong; / Let grace be your shield and Christ your song.”
0.231	And now I have a question to ask: I ask that question of every man and every woman in this place, and of every child too—Is Jesus Christ your friend?
0.232	Have you a friend at court—at heaven’s court?
0.233	Is the judge of the living and the dead your friend?
0.234	Can you say that you love him, and has he ever revealed himself to you in the way of love?
0.235	Dear hearer, do not answer that question for your neighbor; answer it for yourself.
0.236	Peer or peasant, rich or poor, learned or illiterate, this question is for each of you; therefore, ask it: Is Christ my friend?
0.237	Have you ever considered that question?
0.238	Have you ever asked it?
0.239	Oh, to be able to say “Christ is my friend” is one of the sweetest things in the world!
0.240	A man who had lived much in sin one day happened to enter a place of worship.
0.241	Before the sermon, this hymn was sung—
0.242	“Jesus, Lover of my soul.”
0.243	The next day the man was met by an acquaintance who asked him how he liked the sermon.
0.244	He said, “I do not know, but there were two or three words that took such hold of me that I did not know what to do with myself.
0.245	The minister read that hymn, ‘Jesus, Lover of my soul.’
0.246	Ah!” he said—though he was by no means a religious man—“to be able to say that, I would give up all I have!
0.247	But do you think,” he asked, “that Jesus will ever be the lover of such a man as I am?
0.248	‘Jesus, Lover of my soul!’
0.249	Oh, if only I could say it!”
0.250	And then he buried his head in his hands and wept.
0.251	I have every reason to fear that he went back to his sin and was the same afterward as before.
0.252	But, you see, he had conscience enough to let him know how valuable it was to have Christ for his lover and his friend.
0.253	Ah, rich man, you have many friends.
0.254	There are some here who have toiled for their country’s good, and deserve a reward of honor at their country’s hands, who, for one mistake—or what perhaps was a mistake—have been neglected by too many who once appeared to be their most trusty supporters.
0.255	Oh, put no confidence, you great men and you rich, in the loyalty of your friends.
0.256	David said in his haste, “All men are liars”; you may one day have to say it at your leisure.
0.257	And oh, you kind and affectionate hearts, who are not rich in wealth but are rich in love—and that is the world’s best wealth—put this golden coin among your silver ones, and it will sanctify them all.
0.258	Get Christ’s love poured out in your hearts, and your mother’s love, your daughter’s love, your husband’s love, your wife’s love, will become sweeter than ever.
0.259	The love of Christ does not cast out the love of relatives, but it sanctifies our loves and makes them far sweeter.
0.260	Remember, dear hearer, the love of men and women is very sweet; but all must pass away; and what will you do, if you have no wealth but the wealth that fades, and no love but the love that dies, when death comes?
0.261	Oh, to have the love of Christ!
0.262	You can take that across the river of death with you; you can wear it as your bracelet in heaven, and set it as a seal upon your hand; for his love is “strong as death and mightier than the grave.”
0.263	Good old Bishop Beveridge, I think it was, who did not know his best friends when he was dying.
0.264	Someone said, “Bishop Beveridge, do you know me?”
0.265	He said, “Who are you?” and when the name was mentioned, he said, “No.” “But don’t you know your wife, Bishop?”
0.266	“What is her name?” he said.
0.267	She said, “I am your wife.”
0.268	“I did not know I had one,” he said.
0.269	Poor old man! His faculties had all failed him.
0.270	At last someone stooped down and whispered, “Do you know the Lord Jesus Christ?”
0.271	“Yes,” he said, making an effort to speak, “I have known him these forty years, and I can never forget him.”
0.272	It is marvelous how memory will hold its place with Jesus when it will with no one else; and it is equally marvelous that,
0.273	“When all created things run dry, Christ’s fullness is the same.”
0.274	My dear hearers, do think about this matter.
0.275	Oh, that you might get Christ for your friend! He will never be your friend while you are self-righteous; he will never be your friend while you live in sin.
0.276	But do you believe yourselves guilty?
0.277	Do you desire to give up sin?
0.278	Do you want to be saved?
0.279	Do you desire to be renewed?
0.280	Then let me tell you, my Master loves you!
0.281	Poor, weak, and helpless worms, my Master’s heart is full of love toward you; his eyes at this moment are looking down on you with pity.
0.282	“O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Jerusalem!”
0.283	He now asks me to tell you that he died for all of you who confess yourselves to be sinners and feel it.
0.284	He charges me to say to you, “Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and you shall be saved.”
0.285	He tells me to proclaim salvation full and free: full, needing nothing of yours to help it; free, needing nothing of yours to buy it.
0.286	“Come, you thirsty, come and welcome; / God’s free bounty glorify: / True belief and true repentance, / Every grace that brings us near— / Without money, / Come to Jesus Christ, and buy.”
0.287	There is nothing I feel I fail in so much as addressing sinners.
0.288	Oh, I wish I could cry my heart out, and preach my heart out, to you and at you!
0.289	“Dear Savior, draw reluctant hearts, / To you let sinners fly / And take the bliss your love imparts; / And drink, and never die.”
0.290	Farewell, with this one thought—we shall never all of us meet together here again.
0.291	It is a very solemn thought, but according to the course of nature and the number of deaths, even if all of you were willing to come here next Sabbath morning, it is not at all likely that all of you would be alive; one out of this congregation is sure to have gone the way of all flesh.
0.292	Farewell, you who are appointed to death; I do not know where you are—that strong man there, or that tender young woman there with the hectic flush of consumption on her cheek.
0.293	I do not know who is appointed to death; but I do now most solemnly take my farewell of such a one.
0.294	Farewell, poor soul; and is it farewell forever?
0.295	Shall we meet in the land of the hereafter, in the home of the blessed; or do I bid you farewell now forever?
0.296	I do solemnly bid you farewell forever, if you live and die without Christ.
0.297	But I cannot bear that dreary thought; and I therefore say, poor sinner, stop and consider—consider your ways, and now “turn, turn, why will you die?”
0.298	“Why will you die?”
0.299	“Why will you die?”
0.300	“Why will you die?”
0.301	Ah! you cannot answer that question.
0.302	May God help you to answer it in a better way, by saying, “Here, Lord!
0.303	Just as I am, without one plea, / But that your blood was shed for me, / O Son of God, I come to you.
0.304	I trust my soul into your kind hands.”
0.305	The Lord bless you all for Christ’s sake! Amen.
