0.281	Some think it a very friendly act toward Christ to attend many religious services in a consecrated building.
0.282	They are at matins and vespers, and at feasts and fasts without number.
0.283	Some of us prefer to have our religious services each day in our own homes, and it will be a dreadful thing when family prayer is given up for public services; but a number of people think little of family devotion—they feel they must go off to the parish church or to some other temple made with hands. But let no one imagine that Jesus is made our friend in this way.
0.284	We are not to forsake the assembling of ourselves together, as is the manner of some; it is good to be found meeting with God’s people as often as we can. But still you may multiply your sacraments and increase your ceremonies, and you may attend this service and that service, until your heart is worn away with grinding at the mill of outward religion.
0.285	“You are Christ’s friends if you do whatever he commands you”: that is a better test than early communion or daily mass.
0.286	It comes to this, dear friends: we must steadily, carefully, persistently, and cheerfully do the will of God from the heart in daily life, from the first waking moment until our eyes are closed.
0.287	Say concerning everything, “What would Jesus have me do about this?
0.288	What is the teaching of Christ on this?”
0.289	“Whether you eat or drink, or whatever you do, do all in the name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God and the Father through him.”
0.290	You may be a domestic servant and never be able to give a pound to church work, but you are Jesus’ friend if you do whatever he commands you. You may be a housewife and not able to do anything outside the little family that requires all your attention, but if you are fulfilling your duty to your children, doing what Christ commands you, you are among the friends of Jesus.
0.291	You may be only a plain working man, or a tradesman with a small shop; nobody hears your name; but if you set an example of honesty, uprightness, and godliness, doing all things as to Christ because he has saved you, he will call you his friend.
0.292	What title of nobility can equal this?
0.293	Friendship with Christ is worth a thousand dukedoms.
0.294	The practical outcome of it all is this: examine every question of duty in the light of this one inquiry: Will this be a friendly action toward Christ?
0.295	If I do this, shall I be acting as Christ’s friend?
0.296	Will my conduct honor him?
0.297	Then I am glad.
0.298	If it will dishonor him, I will have nothing to do with it.
0.299	Set each separate action, as far as you are able, on the scales, and let this be the weight: Is it a friendly action toward my Redeemer?
0.300	I wish that we all lived as if Jesus were always present, as if we could see his wounds and gaze into his lovely face.
0.301	Suppose that tomorrow you are brought into temptation by being asked to do something questionable; decide it this way: if Jesus could come in at that moment and show you his hands and his feet, how would you act in his sight?
0.302	Behave as you would if the presence of the Well-Beloved were made real to you.
0.303	You would not do anything unkind to him, would you?
0.304	Certainly you would not do anything to grieve him if you saw him before your eyes.
0.305	Well, keep him always before you.
0.306	The psalmist cried, “I have set the Lord always before me.”
0.307	You will need much of the Holy Spirit’s anointing to do this.
0.308	May God give it to you.
0.309	Live, dear friends, as if Christ might come at once and catch you in the very act.
0.310	Do what you would not be ashamed of if the next instant you were to see the Lord sitting on the throne of his glory and calling you before his judgment seat.
0.311	Living like this, you shall delight yourself in the abundance of peace.
0.312	“So shall your walk be close with God, / Calm and serene your mind; / So purer light shall mark the road / That leads you to the Lamb.”
0.313	Obedience will gladden you with the blissful presence of your Lord, and in that presence you shall find fullness of joy.
0.314	You shall be envied by all wise men, for you shall be the beloved of the Lord; and your pathway, if it is not always smooth, shall always be safe, for Jesus never leaves his friend, and he will never leave you, but he will keep you even to the end.
0.315	May this be my happy lot and yours. Amen.
