0.1	“They hated me without a cause.”—John 15:25
0.2	It is generally understood that the quotation our Savior refers to here is to be found in Psalm 35:19, where David says, speaking of himself directly and of the Savior prophetically, “Do not let those who are my enemies rejoice over me, nor let those who hate me without a cause wink with the eye.”
0.3	Our Savior applies that to himself, and so he in effect really tells us that many of the Psalms are Messianic, or refer to the Messiah; and therefore Dr. Hawker was not wrong when he said he believed the Psalms referred to the Savior, though he may have carried the truth too far.
0.4	But it will be a good plan, when we read the Psalms, if we continually look at them as referring not so much to David as to the man of whom David was the type, Jesus Christ, David’s Lord.
0.5	No being was ever more lovely than the Savior; it would seem almost impossible not to have affection for him.
0.6	Certainly at first sight it would seem far harder to hate him than to love him.
0.7	And yet, lovable as he was—indeed, “altogether lovely”—no being met with hatred so early, and no creature ever endured such continual persecution as he had to suffer.
0.8	No sooner is he brought into the world than the sword of Herod is ready to cut him off, and the innocents of Bethlehem, by their dreadful massacre, gave a sad foretaste of the sufferings Christ would endure, and of the hatred that men would pour upon his devoted head.
0.9	From his first moment to the cross, except for the brief lull while he was a child, it seemed as if the whole world were in league against him, and all men sought to destroy him.
0.10	That hatred showed itself in different ways: sometimes in open deeds, as when they took him to the brow of the hill and would have thrown him down headlong, or when they picked up stones again to stone him because he said that Abraham longed to see his day, and saw it, and was glad.
0.11	At other times that hatred showed itself in words of slander, such as these: “He is a drunkard and a winebibber, a friend of tax collectors and sinners”; or in looks of contempt, as when they eyed him with suspicion because he ate with tax collectors and sinners and sat down at table with unwashed hands.
0.12	At other times that hatred lived entirely in their thoughts, and they thought within themselves, “This man blasphemes,” because he said, “Your sins are forgiven you.”
0.13	But at almost every moment there was hatred toward Christ; and when they took hold of him and would have made him king, and a shallow, fleeting flood of popular applause would have carried him on to an unsteady throne, even then there was a hidden hatred toward him, held down only by loaves and fishes, which needed only an equal quantity of loaves and fishes offered by the priests to develop itself into the cry of “Crucify him, crucify him!” instead of the shout of “Hosanna! Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord.”
0.14	Men of every rank hated him.
0.15	Most men have to meet with some opposition; but then it is often the opposition of one class, and there are other classes who regard them with respect.
0.16	The demagogue who is admired by the poor must expect to be despised by the rich; and he who labors for the aristocracy naturally meets with the contempt of the many.
0.17	But here was a man who walked among the people, who loved them, who spoke to rich and poor as though they were (as indeed they are) on one level in his blessed sight; and yet all classes conspired to hate him: the priests decried him because he spoiled their dogmas; the nobles would put him to death because he spoke of being a king; while the poor, for reasons best known to themselves, though they admired his eloquence and would often have fallen prostrate in worship before him because of the wonderful deeds he did—even these, led by men who ought to have guided them better, conspired to put him to death, and to complete their guilt by nailing him to the tree, and then, wagging their heads, told him that if he could build a temple in three days, he should save himself and come down from the cross.
0.18	Christ was the hated one, the slandered and scorned; he was “despised and rejected by men, a man of sorrows and acquainted with grief.”
0.19	Now this morning we will try, first, to justify the Savior’s statement that he was hated without a cause; secondly, to dwell on the sin of men—that men hated him without a cause; and in the third place, to give a lesson or two to Christ’s own people, which they may well learn from the fact that their Savior was hated without a cause.
0.20	I. First, then, beloved, let us JUSTIFY WHAT THE SAVIOR SAID: “They hated me without a cause.”
0.21	And we note that, apart from the consideration of man’s sinfulness and Christ’s purity, there is certainly no cause whatever to be found why the world should have hated him.
0.22	First, let us consider Christ in his person.
0.23	Was there anything in Christ’s person as a man, when he lived in this world, which naturally tended to make anyone hate him?
0.24	Let us note that there was an absence of almost everything that stirs up hatred between one man and another.
0.25	In the first place, there was no great rank in Christ to stir up envy.
0.26	It is a well-known fact that, however good a man may be, if he is raised at all above his fellow creatures by riches or by title, then although men one by one will respect him, the many often speak against him, not so much for what he is as for his rank and his title.
0.27	It seems natural for men in the mass to despise nobles; each man individually thinks it a wonderfully fine thing to know a lord; but put men together, and they will despise lords and bishops and speak very lightly of principalities and powers.
0.28	Now Christ had none of the outward circumstances of rank: he had no chariot, no long sleeves, no elevation above his fellows; when he went out, there were no heralds to attend him, there was no pomp to do him honor.
0.29	In fact, one would think that Christ’s appearance would naturally have stirred up pity.
0.30	Instead of being raised above men, he did in some sense seem to be below them, for foxes had holes and the birds of the air had nests, but the Son of Man had nowhere to lay his head.
0.31	Many a democrat has railed against the archbishop as he went past Lambeth Palace; but would he curse or despise him if he were told that the archbishop had nowhere to lay his head, but simply toiled for the truth’s sake and had no reward?
0.32	The envy naturally stirred up by rank, station and the like could not have operated in Christ’s case; there was nothing in his clothing to attract attention; it was the clothing of a peasant of Galilee—“of one piece, woven from the top throughout.”
0.33	Nor was there anything in his rank.
0.34	He might have been the son of an ancient royal family, but its royalty was apparently extinct, and he was known only as the son of the carpenter.
0.35	So in that sense they hated him “without a cause.”
0.36	Many people seem to have envy stirred up in them against those who exercise rule or government over them.
0.37	The very fact of a man having authority over me stirs up my evil passions, and I begin to look at him with suspicion because he is invested with that authority.
0.38	Some men naturally fall into line and obey simply because the rule has been made; principalities and powers are established, and they submit themselves for the Lord’s sake; but the many, especially in these republican times, seem to have a natural tendency to kick against authority simply because it is authority.
0.39	But if authorities and governments were changed every month, I believe that in some countries—in France, for instance—there would be as many revolutions under one government as under another; in fact, they hate all government there and wish to be without law, so that each man may do what is right in his own eyes.
0.40	But this did not operate in Christ’s case; he was not a king; he did not assume rule over the multitude.
0.41	It is true he was Lord over storms and seas; it is true he could command demons, and, if he pleased, men would have had to be his obedient servants; but he did not assume power over them.
0.42	He marshaled no armies, he proclaimed no laws, he made himself no great one in the land; the people did just as they liked, for all the authority he exercised over them.
0.43	In fact, instead of binding severe laws upon them, he seemed to loosen the rigidity of their system; for when the adulterous woman, who would otherwise have been put to death, was brought before him, he said, “Neither do I condemn you.”
0.44	And he relaxed, to a certain extent, the rigidity of the Sabbath ordinance, which was in some respects too burdensome, saying, “The Sabbath was made for man.”
0.45	Surely, then, they hated him “without a cause.”
0.46	Some men make others dislike them because they are proud.
0.47	I know some men whom I would have liked very well if the starch had been left out of them; I would really sympathize with them and admire them if they had the least degree of condescension, but they seem to walk about the world with such an air of pride!
0.48	They may not be proud—very likely they are not; but, as an old divine said, “When we see a fox’s tail sticking out of a hole, we naturally expect the fox is there.”
0.49	And somehow or other, the human mind cannot bear pride; we always kick against it.
0.50	But there was nothing of that in our Savior.
0.51	How humble he was!
0.52	Why, he stooped to anything.
0.53	He would wash his disciples’ feet; and when he walked about among men, there was no parade about him, as if he would say to them, “See my talent, see my power, see my rank, see my dignity; stand aside, I am greater than you.”
0.54	No, he takes his seat there.
0.55	There is Matthew the tax collector sitting beside him, and he does not think he is harmed by the tax collector, although he is the worst of sinners; and there is a harlot—he speaks to her; there is another with seven devils, and he casts the devils out of her; and another who has leprosy, and he even touches the leper, to show how humble he was and that there was nothing of pride about him.
0.56	Oh, if you could have seen the Savior! He was the very model of humility!
0.57	There were none of your forms of etiquette and politeness about him; he had that true politeness which makes itself affable to all men, because it is kind and loving to all.
0.58	There was no pride in the Savior, and so there was nothing to stir up men’s anger on that account.
0.59	Therefore they hated him “without a cause.”
0.60	There are others whom you cannot help disliking, because they are so snappish and waspish and angry; they look as if they were born on some terribly dark, stormy day, and as if no small quantity of vinegar had been used in the mixing of their bodies.
0.61	You could not sit long with them without feeling that you have to keep your tongue on a fairly tight chain; you must not talk freely, or there would be a quarrel, for they would make you an offender for a word.
0.62	You may say, “So-and-so is no doubt a good man; but really, that temper of his—I cannot bear it.”
0.63	And when a man stands prominently before the public with a nasty, sour disposition, one feels inclined to dislike him.
0.64	But there was nothing of this about our Savior.
0.65	“When he was reviled, he did not revile in return”; if men spat in his face, he said nothing to them; and when they struck him, he did not curse them; he sat still and bore their scorn.
0.66	He walked through the world with contempt and infamy constantly poured upon him; but “he did not answer a word”; he was never angry.
0.67	You cannot find, in reading the Savior’s life, that he spoke one angry word, except those words of holy wrath which he poured like scalding oil on the head of Pharisaic pride; then indeed his wrath did boil, but it was holy wrath.
0.68	With such a loving, kind, gentle spirit, one would have thought he would have gone through the world as easily as possible.
0.69	But, in spite of all that, they hated him.
0.70	Truly we can say, “They hated him without a cause.”
0.71	There is another set of people you can scarcely help disliking: they are selfish people.
0.72	Now, we know some persons who have a very excellent temper, who are extremely honest and upright, but they are so selfish!
0.73	When you are with them, you feel that they are friends to you only for what they can get out of you; and when you have served their purpose, they will simply lay you aside and try to find another.
0.74	In trying to do good, their good deed has an ulterior object, but somehow or other they are always found out; and no man in the world receives a greater share of public contempt than the man who lives a selfish life.
0.75	Among the most miserable men in the universe, kicked about the world like a football, is the selfish miser.
0.76	But in Christ there was nothing selfish; whatever he did, he did for others.
0.77	He had a marvelous power of working miracles, but he would not even turn a stone into bread for himself; he reserved his miraculous power for others; he did not seem to have a particle of self in his whole nature.
0.78	In fact, the description of his life might be written very briefly: “He saved others; himself he did not save.”
0.79	He walked about; he touched the poorest, the lowliest, and those who were most sick; he did not care what men might say of him; he seemed to have no regard for fame, or dignity, or ease, or honor.
0.80	Neither his bodily nor his mental comforts were in the least regarded by him.
0.81	Self-sacrifice was the life of Christ; but he did it with such ease that it seemed no sacrifice.
0.82	Ah, beloved, in that sense they certainly hated Christ without a cause; for there was nothing in Christ to stir up their hatred—in fact, there was everything, on the other hand, to bind the whole world to love and revere a character so eminently unselfish.
0.83	There is another sort of people I do not like, namely, the hypocritical; indeed, I think I could even live with the selfish man if I knew him to be selfish; but the hypocrite—do not let him come anywhere near where I am.
0.84	Let a public man be a hypocrite once, and the world will scarcely trust him again; they will hate him.
0.85	But Christ was free from any blame in this respect; and if they hated him, they did not hate him for that, for there never was a more unvarnished man than Christ.
0.86	He was called, you know, the child Jesus; because just as a child speaks his mind out and has no reserve and no craftiness, so it was with Jesus; he had no affectation, no deceit.
0.87	There was no change about him; he was “without variableness or shadow of turning.”
0.88	Whatever the world may say of Christ, they never said they believed he was a hypocrite; and among all the slanders they brought against him, they never disputed his sincerity.
0.89	Had they been able to show that he really had been deceiving them, they might have had some grounds for hating him; but he lived in the sunlight of sincerity and walked on the very mountaintop of continual observation.
0.90	He could not be a hypocrite, and men knew he could not; and yet men hated him.
0.91	Truly, my friends, if you survey the character of Christ in all its loveliness, in all its benevolence, in all its sincerity, in all its self-devotion, in all its intense eagerness to benefit man, you must indeed say, “They hated him without a cause.” There was nothing in Christ’s person to lead men to hate him.
0.92	In the next place, was there anything in Christ’s errand that could make people hate him?
0.93	If they had asked him, “For what reason have you come from heaven?” would there have been anything in his answer likely to stir up their indignation and hatred?
0.94	I think not. For what purpose did he come?
0.95	He came, first of all, to explain mysteries—to tell them what was meant by the sacrificial lamb, what the significance of the scapegoat was, what was intended by the ark, the bronze serpent, and the pot of manna; he came to tear the veil of the Holy of Holies and to show men secrets they had never seen before.
0.96	Should they have hated one who lifted the veil of mystery, made dark things light, and explained riddles?
0.97	Should they have hated him who taught them what Abraham longed to see, and what prophets and kings had longed to know but died without knowing?
0.98	Was there anything in that to make them hate him?
0.99	What else did he come for?
0.100	He came to earth to reclaim the wanderer; and is there anything in that which should make men hate Christ?
0.101	If he came to reform the drunkard, to reclaim the harlot, to gather in the tax collectors and sinners, and to bring prodigals back to their father’s house, surely that is an aim with which every philanthropist should agree; it is the very thing for which our governments are formed and fashioned, to bring men to a better state; and if Christ came for that purpose, was there anything in that to make men hate him?
0.102	For what else did he come?
0.103	He came to heal the diseases of the body; is that a legitimate object of hatred?
0.104	Shall I hate the physician who goes about healing all kinds of diseases free of charge?
0.105	Are deaf ears unstopped, are mouths opened, are the dead raised, are the blind made to see, and widows blessed with their sons?
0.106	Are these reasons why a man should be odious?
0.107	Surely he might well say, “For which of these works do you stone me?
0.108	If I have done good works, why do you speak against me?”
0.109	But none of these works were the cause of men’s hatred; they hated him without a cause.
0.110	And he came to earth to die, so that sinners might not die?
0.111	Was that a cause of hatred?
0.112	Ought I to hate the Savior because he came to quench the flames of hell for me?
0.113	Should I despise him who allowed his Father’s flaming sword to be quenched in his own lifeblood?
0.114	Shall I look with indignation on the substitute who takes my sin and griefs upon himself and carries my sorrows?
0.115	Shall I hate and despise the man who loved me better than he loved himself—who loved me so much that he visited the gloomy grave for my salvation?
0.116	Are these the causes of hatred?
0.117	Surely his errand was one that ought to have made us sing his praise forever and join the harps of angels in their rapturous songs.
0.118	“They hated me without a cause.”
0.119	But once more: was there anything in Christ’s doctrine that should have made us hate him?
0.120	No, we answer; there was nothing in his doctrine that should have stirred up men’s hatred.
0.121	Take the precepts in his teaching.
0.122	Did he not teach us to do to others as we would have them do to us?
0.123	Was he not also the exponent of everything lovely and honorable and of good report?
0.124	And was not his teaching the very essence of virtue, so that if virtue itself had written it, it could not have written such a perfect code of lovely morals and excellent virtues?
0.125	Was it the ethical part of his doctrines that men hated?
0.126	He taught that rich and poor must stand on one level; he taught that his gospel was not to be confined to one particular nation, but was to be gloriously expansive, so as to cover the world.
0.127	This, perhaps, was one principal reason for their hating him; but surely there was no justifiable cause for their indignation in this.
0.128	There was nothing in Christ to lead men to hate him.
0.129	“They hated him without a cause.”
0.130	II. And now, in the second place, I come to dwell on MAN’S SIN, that he should have hated the Savior without a cause.
0.131	Ah, beloved, I will not tell you of man’s adulteries and fornications and murders and poisonings and sodomies.
0.132	I will not tell you of man’s wars and bloodsheds and cruelties and rebellions; if I want to tell you man’s sin, I must tell you that man is a deicide—that he put his God to death and killed his Savior; and when I have told you that, I have given you the essence of all sin, the masterpiece of crime, the very pinnacle and climax of the terrifying pyramid of mortal guilt.
0.133	Man outdid himself when he put his Savior to death, and sin out-Heroded Herod when it killed the Lord of the universe, the lover of the human race, who came to earth to die.
0.134	Never does sin appear so exceedingly sinful as when we see it aimed at the person of Christ, whom it hated without a cause.
0.135	In every other case where man has hated goodness, there have always been some extenuating circumstances.
0.136	We never see goodness in this world without alloy; however great any man’s goodness may be, there is always some peg on which we may hang a criticism; however excellent a man may be, there is always some fault which may diminish our admiration or our love.
0.137	But in the Savior there was nothing of this.
0.138	There was nothing that could blot the picture; holiness stood out to the very life; there was holiness—only holiness.
0.139	Let a man hate Whitefield, one of the holiest men who ever lived, and he would tell you that he did not hate his goodness, but hated his ranting preaching and the extraordinary anecdotes he told; or he would pull out something that fell from his lips and hold it up to ridicule.
0.140	But in Christ’s case men could not do that; for though they sought false witnesses, yet their witnesses did not agree together.
0.141	There was nothing in him but holiness; and anyone with half an eye can see that the thing men hated was simply that Christ was perfect; they could not have hated him for anything else.
0.142	And so you see the abominable, detestable evil of the human heart—that man hates goodness simply because it is goodness.
0.143	It is not true that we Christian people are hated because of our infirmities; men make our infirmities a nail on which to hang their laughter; but if we were not Christians, they would not hate our infirmities.
0.144	They hold our inconsistencies up to ridicule; but I do not believe our inconsistencies are what they care about; we might be as inconsistent as all the rest of the world if we did not profess religion, or if they did not think we had any.
0.145	But because the Savior had no inconsistencies or infirmities, men were stripped of all their excuses for hating him, and it came out that man naturally hates goodness, because he is so evil that he cannot help detesting it.
0.146	And now let me appeal to every sinner present and ask him whether he ever had any cause for hating Christ.
0.147	But someone says, “I do not hate him; if he were to come to my house, I would love him very much.”
0.148	But it is very remarkable that Christ lives next door to you, in the person of poor Betty there.
0.149	She goes to such-and-such a chapel, and you say she is nothing but a poor canting Methodist.
0.150	Why don’t you like Betty?
0.151	She is one of Christ’s members, and “Inasmuch as you have done it to one of the least of these, you have done it to me.”
0.152	You say you do not hate Christ.
0.153	Now, look across the chapel.
0.154	Don’t you know a man, a member of this place, a very holy man, whom somehow or other you cannot bear, because he once told you of your faults?
0.155	Ah, sir, if you loved Christ, you would love his members.
0.156	What! Do you tell me you love my head, but you do not love my hands?
0.157	My dear fellow, you cannot cut my head off and leave me the same person.
0.158	If you love Christ the head, you must love his members.
0.159	But you say, “I do love his people.”
0.160	Very well, then you have passed from death to life, if you love the brothers.
0.161	But you say, “I am not sure that I am a changed character; still, I am not aware that there is any opposition in my heart to Christ and his gospel.”
0.162	You may not be aware of it, but it is your not being aware of it that makes your case all the sadder.
0.163	Perhaps if you knew it and wept over it, you would come to Christ; but since you do not know it and do not feel it, that is a proof of your hostility.
0.164	Now come! I must suppose you to be hostile to Christ unless you love him; for I know there are only two opinions of him.
0.165	You must either hate him or love him.
0.166	As for indifference with regard to Christ, it is simply a clear impossibility.
0.167	A man might as well say, “I am indifferent toward honesty.”
0.168	Why, then he is dishonest, is he not?
0.169	You are indifferent to Christ?
0.170	Then you hate him.
0.171	And why is it that you hate him?
0.172	Many a time you have been wooed by the gospel; you have resisted appeals, many of them; come now, for which of Christ’s works do you hate him?
0.173	Is there a persecutor here?
0.174	Sinner! For what do you hate Christ?
0.175	Do you curse him?
0.176	Tell me what he has done, that you should be angry with him.
0.177	Point to a single fault of his in his conduct toward you. Has Christ ever hurt you?
0.178	“Oh,” says one, “he has taken my wife and made her one of his children, and she has been baptized and goes to chapel, and I cannot bear that.”
0.179	Ah, sinner, is that why you hate Christ?
0.180	Would you have hated Christ if he had snatched your wife from the flames, if he had saved her from going down to death?
0.181	No, you would love him.
0.182	And he has saved your wife’s soul.
0.183	Ah! Even if he never saves you, if you love your wife, you will have cause enough to love him, when you think that he has been so good to you.
0.184	I tell you, if you hate Christ, you not only hate him without a cause, but you hate him when you have clear cause to love him.
0.185	Come, poor sinner, what have you gained by hating Christ?
0.186	You have stings of conscience.
0.187	Many a sinner, by hating Christ, has been locked up in jail, has a ragged coat, a diseased body, a nasty, filthy house with broken windows, a poor wife nearly beaten to death, and children who scamper out of the way as soon as father comes home.
0.188	What have you gained by hating Christ?
0.189	Oh, if you were to reckon up your gains, you would find that getting Christ would be a gain, but that hating him is a dead loss to you.
0.190	Now, if you hate Christ and Christ’s religion, I tell you that you hate Christ without a cause; and let me give you one solemn warning, which is this: if you keep on hating Christ until you die, you will not hurt Christ by it, but you will hurt yourself most terribly.
0.191	Oh, may God deliver you from being haters of Christ!
0.192	There is nothing to gain by it, but everything to lose by it.
0.193	For what cause do you hate Christ, sinner?
0.194	For what cause do you hate Christ, persecutor?
0.195	For what cause do you hate Christ, you carnal, ungodly men?
0.196	What do you hate Christ’s gospel for?
0.197	His ministers—what harm have they done you?
0.198	What harm can they do you, when they long to do you all the good in the world?
0.199	Why is it that you hate Christ?
0.200	Ah! It is only because you are so desperately set on mischief—because the poison of asps is under your lips, and your throat is an open grave.
0.201	Otherwise you would love Christ.
0.202	They hated him “without a cause.”
0.203	And now, Christian men, I must preach at you for just a moment.
0.204	Surely you have great reason to love Christ now, for you once hated him without a cause.
0.205	Did you ever treat a friend badly and not know it?
0.206	It has been the misfortune of most of us to do so at times.
0.207	We had some suspicion that a friend had done us an injury; we quarreled with him for weeks, and he had not done it at all.
0.208	All he had done was to warn us.
0.209	Ah! There are never tears like those we shed when we have wronged a friend.
0.210	And should we not weep when we have wronged the Savior?
0.211	Did he not come to my door one cold, damp night, and I shut my door against him?
0.212	Oh, I have done what I cannot undo; I have slighted my Lord, I have insulted my friend, I have heaped dishonor on him whom I admire.
0.213	Shall I not weep for him?
0.214	Oh, shall I not spend my very life for him? For my sins, my own treachery, spilled his blood.
0.215	Monuments—ah, monuments I will build, wherever I live, wherever I go.
0.216	I will pile up monuments of praise, so that his name may be spread; and wherever I wander, I will tell with many a tear what he did, and that I so long ill-treated him and so fearfully misunderstood him.
0.217	We hated him without a cause; therefore let us love him.
H:0.16	III. TWO LESSONS FOR THE SAINTS.
0.218	In the first place, if your Master was hated without a cause, do not expect to get off very easily in this world.
0.219	If your Master was subjected to all this contempt and all this pain, do you suppose you will always ride through this world in a chariot?
0.220	If you do, you will be greatly mistaken.
0.221	As your Master was persecuted, you must expect to be the same.
0.222	Some of you pity us when we are persecuted and despised.
0.223	Ah, save your pity; keep it for those of whom the world speaks well; keep it for those against whom the woe is pronounced.
0.224	“Woe to you when all men speak well of you.”
0.225	Save your pity for earth’s favorites; save your pity for this world’s lords, who are applauded by all men.
0.226	We do not ask for your pity; no, sirs, in all these things we rejoice, and “glory in tribulations also, knowing that the things which happen to us happen for the furtherance of the gospel”; and we count it all joy when we fall into all sorts of trials, for we rejoice that the name of Christ is known and his kingdom extended.
0.227	The other lesson is: take care, if the world does hate you, that it hates you without a cause.
0.228	If the world is going to oppose you, it is of no use making the world oppose you.
0.229	This world is bitter enough without my putting vinegar in it.
0.230	Some people seem to imagine the world will persecute them; so they put themselves into a fighting posture, as if they were inviting persecution.
0.231	Now, I do not see any good in doing that.
0.232	Do not try to make other people dislike you.
0.233	Really, the opposition some people meet with is not for righteousness’ sake, but for their own sin’s sake, or their own nasty temper’s sake.
0.234	Many a Christian lives in a household—a Christian servant girl, perhaps; she says she is persecuted for righteousness’ sake.
0.235	But she has a bad disposition; she sometimes speaks sharply, and then her mistress rebukes her.
0.236	That is not being persecuted for righteousness’ sake.
0.237	There is another, a merchant in the city, perhaps; he is not held in much esteem.
0.238	He says he is persecuted for righteousness’ sake; whereas it is because he did not keep a bargain some time ago.
0.239	Another man says he is persecuted for righteousness’ sake; but he goes about assuming authority over everybody, and now and then people turn around and reproach him.
0.240	See to it, Christian people, that if you are persecuted, it is for righteousness’ sake; for if you bring any persecution on yourself, you must bear it yourself.
0.241	The persecutions you bring on yourself by your own sins—Christ has nothing to do with them; they are chastisements on you.
0.242	They hated Christ without a cause; then do not fear to be hated.
0.243	They hated Christ without a cause; then do not court being hated, and give the world no cause for it.
0.244	And now may you who hate Christ love him! Oh, that he would bring himself to you now!
0.245	Oh, that he would show himself to you!
0.246	And then surely you must love him at once.
0.247	He who believes on the Lord Jesus will be sure to love him, and he who loves him shall be saved.
0.248	Oh, that God would give you faith, and give you love, for Christ Jesus’ sake! Amen.
