0.1	The story of Moses is one of the most beautiful and fascinating stories in all the world.
0.2	It takes hold of us and never for an instant loses its interest, for it is told so vividly that once heard it is never forgotten.
0.3	I have often imagined the anxiety with which that child was born, for he came into the world with a sentence of death hanging over him, since Pharaoh had decreed that the male children should die.
0.4	The mother defied even the command of the king and determined that the child should live, and right from the beginning the battle of right against might was fought at the cradle.
0.5	The mother of Moses was a slave.
0.6	She had to work in the brickyards or labor in the fields, but God was on her side and she won, as a mother always wins with God on her side.
0.7	Before going to work she had to choose some hiding place for her child, and she put his little sister, Miriam, on guard while she kept herself from being seen by the soldiers of Pharaoh, who were searching everywhere to murder the Jewish male children.
0.8	For three months she kept him hidden, possibly finding a new hiding place every few days.
0.9	It is hard to imagine anything more difficult than hiding a healthy, growing baby, and he was hidden for three months.
0.10	Now he had grown larger and more full of life, and a safer hiding place had to be found, and I can imagine this mother giving up her rest and sleep to prepare an ark for the saving of her child.
0.11	I believe the plan must have been formed in heaven.
0.12	I have often thought that God must have been as much interested in that work as the mother of Moses was, for you can't make me believe that an event so important as that, and so far-reaching in its results, ever happened by luck or chance.
0.13	Possibly God whispered the plan to the mother when she went to Him in prayer and in her grief, because she was afraid the sword of Pharaoh would murder her child.
0.14	And how carefully the material from which the ark was made had to be selected!
0.15	I think every twig was carefully examined so that nothing poor might get into its makeup, and into the weaving of that ark the mother's heart, her soul, her prayers and her tears were interwoven.
0.16	Oh, if you mothers would exercise as much care over the company your children keep, over the books they read and the places they go, there would not be so many girls feeding the red-light district, nor so many boys growing up to lead criminal lives.
0.17	And with what thanksgiving she must have poured out her heart when at last the work was done and the ark was ready to carry its precious cargo, more precious than if it were to hold the crown jewels of Egypt.
0.18	And I can imagine the last night that baby spent in the home.
0.19	Probably some of you can remember when the last night came that your baby was alive; you can remember the last night the coffin stayed, and the next day when the pallbearers and the hearse came.
0.20	The others may have slept soundly, but there was no sleep for you, and I can imagine there was no sleep for the mother of Moses.
0.21	"There are whips and tops and pieces of string / And shoes that no little feet ever wear; / There are bits of ribbon and broken wings / And locks of golden hair.
0.22	"There are dainty jackets that are never worn, / There are toys and models of ships; / There are books and pictures all faded and torn / And marked by the fingertips / Of dimpled hands that have fallen to dust— / Yet we strive to believe that the Lord is just.
0.23	"Yet a feeling of bitterness fills our soul; / Sometimes we try to pray, / That the Reaper has spared so many flowers / And taken ours away. / And we sometimes doubt if the Lord can know / How our broken hearts loved them so.
0.24	"But we think of our dear ones dead, / Our children who never grow old, / And how they are waiting and watching for us / In the city with streets of gold; / And how they are safe through all the years / From sickness and want and war. / We thank the great God, with falling tears, / For the things in the cabinet drawer."
H:0.9	A Mother's Watchfulness
0.25	Others in the house might have slept, but she could not spare a moment of the precious time allotted to her with her little one, and all through the night she must have prayed that God would shield and protect her baby and bless the work she had done and the step she was about to take.
0.26	Some people often say to me: "I wonder what the angels do; how do they spend their time?"
0.27	I think I know what some of them were doing that night.
0.28	You can bet they were not off at some bridge-whist party.
0.29	They guarded that house so carefully that not one soldier of old Pharaoh ever crossed the threshold.
0.30	They saw to it that not one of them harmed that baby.
0.31	At dawn the mother must have kissed him good-bye, placed him in the ark and hidden him among the reeds and rushes, and with an aching heart and tear-dimmed eyes turned back again to the field and back to the brickyards to labor and to wait and see what God would do.
0.32	She had done her prayerful best, and when you have done that, you can bank on God to give the help you need.
0.33	If only we believed that with God all things are possible, no matter how unlikely, what unexpected answers the Lord would give to our prayers!
0.34	She knew God would help her somehow, but I don't think she ever dreamed that God would help her by sending Pharaoh's daughter to care for the child.
0.35	It was no harder for God to send the princess than it was to get the mother to prepare the ark.
0.36	What was impossible from her point of view was easy for God.
0.37	Pharaoh's daughter came down to the water to bathe, and the ark was discovered, just as God wanted it to be, and one of her maids was sent to bring it.
0.38	You often wonder what the angels are doing.
0.39	I think some of the angels kept the crocodiles herded on the other side of the Nile to keep them from finding Moses and eating him up.
0.40	You can bank on it: all heaven was concerned to see that not one hair of that baby's head was harmed.
0.41	There were not enough devils in hell to pull one hair out of its head.
0.42	The ark was brought, and with a woman's curiosity the daughter of Pharaoh had to look into it to see what was there, and when they removed the cover, there lay a strong, healthy baby boy, kicking up his heels and sucking his thumbs, as most of us probably did when we were boys, and as you probably did when you were a girl.
0.43	The baby looks up and weeps, and those tears blotted out all that was against it and gave it a chance for its life.
0.44	I don't know, but I think an angel stood there and pinched it to make it cry, for it cried at just the right time.
0.45	Just as God plans.
0.46	God always does things at the right time.
0.47	Give God a chance; He may be a little slow at times, but He will always get there in time.
0.48	The tears of that baby were the jewels with which Israel was ransomed from Egyptian bondage.
0.49	The princess had a woman's heart, and when a woman's heart and a baby's tears meet, something happens that gives the devil cold feet.
0.50	Perhaps the princess had had a baby who died, and the sight of Moses may have torn the wound open and made it bleed afresh.
0.51	But she had a woman's heart, and that made her forget she was the daughter of Pharaoh, and she was determined to give protection to that baby.
0.52	Faithful Miriam (the Lord be praised for Miriam) saw the heart of the princess reflected in her face.
0.53	Miriam had studied faces so much that she could read the princess's heart as plainly as if it were written in an open book, and she said to her: "Shall I go and get one of the Hebrew women to nurse the child for you?" And the princess said, "Go."
0.54	I see her little feet and legs fly as she runs down the hot, dusty road, and her mother must have seen her coming a mile away, and she ran to meet her and to have her own baby put back into her arms.
0.55	And she was being paid in Egyptian gold to take care of her own baby.
0.56	Do you see how the Lord does things?
0.57	"Now you take this child and nurse it for me, and I will pay you your wages."
0.58	It was a joke on Pharaoh's daughter, paying the mother of Moses for doing what she wanted to do more than anything else—nurse her own baby.
0.59	How quickly the mother was repaid for those long hours of anxiety and alarm and grief, and if the angels know what is going on, what a merry time there must have been in heaven when they saw Moses and Miriam back at home, under the protection of the daughter of Pharaoh!
0.60	I imagine she dropped to her knees and poured out her heart to God, who had helped her so gloriously.
0.61	She must have said: "Well, Lord, I knew You would help me.
0.62	I knew You would take care of my baby when I made the ark and put him in it and set it in the water, but I never dreamed that You would put him back into my arms to care for, so that I would not have to work and slave in the field and make bricks and be tortured almost to death for fear that the soldiers of Pharaoh would find my baby and kill him.
0.63	I never thought You would soften the stony heart of Pharaoh and make him pay me for what I would rather do than anything else in this world."
0.64	I expect to meet the mother of Moses in heaven, and I am going to ask her how much old Pharaoh had to pay her for that job.
0.65	I think that is one of the best jokes—that old sinner having to pay the mother to take care of her own baby.
0.66	But I tell you, if you give God a chance, He will fill your heart to overflowing.
0.67	Just give Him a chance.
H:0.17	A Mother's Bravery
0.68	This mother had remarkable pluck.
0.69	Everything was against her, but she would not give up.
0.70	Her heart never failed.
0.71	She fought as brave a fight as any man ever fought at the sound of the cannon or the roar of musketry.
0.72	"The bravest battle that was ever fought, / Shall I tell you where and when? / On the maps of the world you will not find it— / It was fought by the mothers of men.
0.73	"No, not with cannon or battle shot, / With sword or noble pen, / No, not with the eloquent word or thought / From the mouths of wonderful men.
0.74	"But deep in the walled-up woman's heart— / Of women who would not yield, / But bravely, silently bore their part— / See, there is the battlefield.
0.75	"No marshaling troops, no bivouac song, / No banner to gleam and wave; / But oh, these battles, they last so long— / From babyhood to the grave."
0.76	Mothers are always brave when the safety of their children is at stake.
0.77	This incident took place out West.
0.78	A mother was working in a garden, and her little one was sitting under a tree in the yard, playing.
0.79	The mother heard the child scream; she ran, and a huge snake was wrapping its coils around the baby, and as its head swung around she leaped and seized it by the neck and tore it from her baby and hurled it against a tree.
0.80	Fathers frequently give up.
0.81	The old man often takes to boozing, becomes dissipated, takes a dose of poison and commits suicide; but the mother will stand by the home and keep the little band together, even if she has to manicure her fingernails over a washboard to do it.
0.82	If men had half as much grit as the women, there would be different stories written about a good many homes.
0.83	Look at her work!
0.84	It is the greatest in the world; in its far-reaching importance it rises transcendently above everything in the universe—her task of molding hearts and lives and shaping character.
0.85	If you want to find greatness, don't go to the throne; go to the cradle; and the nearer you get to the cradle, the nearer you get to greatness.
0.86	Now, when Jesus wanted to give His disciples an impressive object lesson, He called in a college professor, did He?
0.87	Hardly. He brought in a little child and said: "Unless you become as one of these, you shall by no means enter the kingdom of God."
0.88	The work is so important that God will not trust anybody with it but a mother.
0.89	The launching of a boy or a girl to live for Christ is a greater work than the launching of a battleship.
0.90	Moses was a chosen vessel of the Lord, and God wanted him to get the right kind of start, so He gave him a good mother.
0.91	There was not a college professor in all Egypt whom God would trust with that baby! So He put the child back into its mother's arms.
0.92	He knew that the best one on earth to trust with that baby was its own mother.
0.93	When God sends us great men, He wants them to get the right kind of start.
0.94	So He sees to it that they have a good mother.
0.95	Almost any old stick will do for a daddy.
0.96	God is particular about the mothers.
H:0.27	Good Mothers Needed
0.97	And so the great need of this country, or of any other country, is good mothers, and I believe we have more good mothers in America than any other nation on earth.
0.98	If Washington's mother had been like a Happy Hooligan's mother, Washington would have been a Happy Hooligan.
0.99	Somebody has said: "God could not be everywhere, so He gave us mothers."
0.100	Now, there may be poetry in it, but it is true "that the hand that rocks the cradle rules the world," and if every cradle were rocked by a good mother, the world would be full of good men, as sure as you breathe.
0.101	If every boy and every girl today had a good mother, the saloons and houses of ill repute would go out of business tomorrow.
0.102	A young man once joined a church, and the preacher asked him: "What was it I said that led you to become a Christian?"
0.103	The young man said: "Nothing that I ever heard you say; it was the way my mother lived."
0.104	I tell you, an ounce of example outweighs forty million tons of theory and speculation.
0.105	If mothers would live as they should, we preachers would have little to do.
0.106	Keep the devil out of the boys and girls, and he will get out of the world.
0.107	The old sinners will die off if we keep the young ones clean.
0.108	The biggest place in the world is the one being filled by the people who are closely in touch with youth.
0.109	Being a king, an emperor or a president is mighty small potatoes compared to being a mother or a teacher of children, whether in a public school or in a Sunday school, and they fill places so great that there is not an angel in heaven who would not gladly give a bushel of diamonds to boot to come down here and take their places.
0.110	Commanding an army is little more than sweeping a street or pounding an anvil compared with the training of a boy or girl.
0.111	The mother of Moses did more for the world than all the kings Egypt ever had.
0.112	To teach a child to love truth and hate a lie, to love purity and hate vice, is greater than inventing a flying machine that will take you to the moon before breakfast.
0.113	Without realizing it, you set in motion influences that will damn or bless the old universe and bring new worlds out of chaos and transform them for God.
H:0.33	God's Hall of Fame
0.114	A man sent a friend of mine some crystals and said: "One of these crystals, as large as a pinpoint, will give a distinguishable green hue to sixteen hogsheads of water."
0.115	Think of it! Power enough in an atom to tint sixteen hogsheads of water.
0.116	There is power in a word or an act to blight a boy and, through him, to curse a community.
0.117	There is power enough in a word to tint the life of that child so that it will become a power to lift the world to Jesus Christ.
0.118	Mothers will set in motion influences that will touch either heaven or hell.
0.119	Talk about greatness!
0.120	Oh, you wait until you reach the mountains of eternity; then read the mothers' names in God's hall of fame, and see what they have been in this world.
0.121	Wait until you see God's hall of fame; you will see women bent over the washtub there.
0.122	I want to tell you women that fooling away your time hugging and kissing a poodle dog, caressing a "Spitz," drinking society brandy-mash and cocktails, and playing cards, is mighty small business compared to molding the life of a child.
0.123	Tell me, where did Moses get his faith?
0.124	From his mother. Where did Moses get the backbone to say, "I will not be called the son of Pharaoh's daughter"?
0.125	He got it from his mother.
0.126	Where did Moses get the nerve to say, "Excuse me, please," to the pleasures of Egypt?
0.127	He got it from his mother.
0.128	You can bank on it: he didn't breathe it in from his dad.
0.129	Many a boy would have turned out better if his old dad had died before the boy was born.
0.130	You tell your boy to stay out of bad company.
0.131	Sometimes, when he walks down the street with his father, he is in the worst company in town.
0.132	His dad smokes, drinks and chews.
0.133	Moses got it from his mother.
0.134	He was learned in all the wisdom of Egypt, but that did not give him a swelled head.
0.135	When God wants to throw a world out into space, He is not concerned about it.
0.136	The first mile that world travels settles its course for eternity.
0.137	When God throws a child out into the world, He is mighty anxious that it gets a good start.
0.138	The Catholics are right when they say: "Give us the children until they are ten years old, and we do not care who has them after that."
0.139	The Catholics are not losing any sleep over losing men and women from their church membership.
0.140	It is the only church that has ever shown us the only sensible way to reach the masses—that is, by getting hold of the children.
0.141	That is the only way on God's earth that you will ever solve the problem of reaching the masses.
0.142	Get the boys and girls started right, and the devil will hang crape on his door and bank his fires, and hell will be for rent before the Fourth of July.
0.143	A friend of mine has a little girl whom she had to take to the hospital for an operation.
0.144	They thought she would be frightened, but she said: "I don't care, if mama will be there and hold my hand."
0.145	They prepared her for the operation, led her into the room, put her on the table, put the cone over her face and saturated it with ether, and she said: "Now, mama, take me by the hand and hold it, and I will not be afraid."
0.146	And the mother stood there and held her hand.
0.147	The operation was performed, and when she regained consciousness they said: "Bessie, weren't you afraid when they put you on the table?"
0.148	She said: "No, mama stood there and held my hand.
0.149	I was not afraid."
0.150	There is a mighty power in a mother's hand.
0.151	There is more power in a woman's hand than in a king's scepter.
0.152	And there is a mighty power in a mother's kiss—inspiration, courage, hope, ambition—in a mother's kiss.
0.153	One kiss made Benjamin West a painter, and the memory of it stayed with him all through life.
0.154	One kiss will drive away the fear in the dark and make the little one brave.
0.155	It will give strength where there is weakness.
0.156	I was in a town one day and saw a mother out with her boy, and he had great steel braces on both legs, up to his hips, and when I got near enough to them I learned from their conversation that this was not the first time the mother had taken him out for a walk.
0.157	She had him out exercising so that he would get the use of his limbs.
0.158	He was struggling, and she smiled and said: "You are doing well today; better than you did yesterday."
0.159	And she stooped and kissed him, and the kiss of encouragement made him work all the harder, and she said: "You are doing nobly, son."
0.160	And he said: "Mama, I'm going to run; watch me."
0.161	And he started, and one of his toes caught on the steel brace on the other leg and he stumbled, but she caught him and kissed him and said: "That was fine, son; how well you did it!"
0.162	Now, he did it because his mother had encouraged him with a kiss.
0.163	He did not do it to show off.
0.164	There is nothing that will help and inspire a life like a mother's kiss.
0.165	"If we knew the baby fingers pressed against the windowpane / Would be cold and still tomorrow, never to trouble us again, / Would the bright eyes of our darling catch the frown upon our brow?
0.166	"Let us gather up the sunbeams lying all around our path, / Let us keep the wheat and roses, casting out the thorns and chaff! / We shall find our sweetest comforts in the blessings of today, / With a patient hand removing all the briers from our way."
H:0.45	A Mother's Song
0.167	There is power in a mother's song, too.
0.168	It is the best music the world has ever heard.
0.169	The best music in the world is like biscuits—it is the kind mother makes.
0.170	There is no brass band or pipe organ that can hold a candle to mother's song.
0.171	Calvé, Melba, Nordica, Eames, Schumann-Heink—they are cheap skates compared to mother.
0.172	They cannot sing at all.
0.173	They do not know the rudiments of the kind of music mother sings.
0.174	The kind she sings gets tangled up in your heartstrings.
0.175	The music of heaven would be a disappointment to me if there were no mothers there to sing.
0.176	The song of an angel or a seraph would not have much charm for me.
0.177	What would you care for an angel's song if there were no mother's song?
0.178	The song of a mother is sweeter than any ever sung by minstrel or written by poet.
0.179	Talk about sonnets! You ought to hear a mother sing when her baby is at her breast, when her heart is filled with emotion.
0.180	Her voice may not please an artist, but it will please anyone who has a heart in him.
0.181	The songs that have moved the world are not the songs written by the great masters.
0.182	The best music, in my judgment, is not the flawless performance of these high-priced opera singers.
0.183	There is nothing in art that can put into melody the happiness that associations and memories bring.
0.184	I think that when we reach heaven we will find that some of the best songs we sing there will be those we learned at mother's knee.
H:0.48	A Mother's Love
0.185	There is power in a mother's love.
0.186	A mother's love must be like the love of God.
0.187	How God could ever have told the world that He loved it without a mother's help has often puzzled me.
0.188	If the devils in hell ever turned pale, it was on the day a mother's love flamed up for the first time in a woman's heart.
0.189	If the devil ever got "cold feet," it was that day, in my judgment.
0.190	You know, a mother has to love her baby before it is born.
0.191	Like God, she has to go into the shadows of the valley of death to bring it into the world, and she will love her child and suffer for it, and it can grow up and become vile, and yet she will love it.
0.192	Nothing will make her blame it, and I think, women, that one of the awful things in hell will be that there will be no mother's love there.
0.193	Nothing but black, bottomless, endless, eternal hate in hell—no mother's love.
0.194	"And though he creeps through the vilest caves of sin, / And crouches, perhaps, with bleary and bloodshot eyes, / Under the hangman's rope—a mother's lips / Will kiss him in his last bed of disgrace, / And love him even for what she hoped of him."
0.195	I thank God for what a mother's love has done for the world.
0.196	Oh, there is power in a mother's trust.
0.197	Just as surely as Moses was put into his mother's arms by the princess, so God has put the babies into your arms, as a charge from Him to raise and care for.
0.198	Every child is put into a mother's arms as a trust from God, and she has to answer to God for the way she deals with that child.
0.199	No mother on God's earth has any right to raise her children for pleasure.
0.200	She has no right to send them to dancing school and to haunts of sin.
0.201	You have no right to do those things that will curse your children.
0.202	That baby is put into your arms to be trained for the Lord.
0.203	No mother has any more right to raise her children for pleasure than I have to pick your pockets or throw red pepper in your eyes.
0.204	She has no more right to do that than a bank cashier has to rifle the vaults and take the savings of the people.
0.205	One of the worst sins you can commit is to be unfaithful to your trust.
H:0.54	A Mother's Responsibility
0.206	"Take this child and nurse it for me."
0.207	That is all the business you have with it.
0.208	That is a jewel that belongs to God, and He gives it to you to polish for Him so He can set it in a crown.
0.209	Who knows but that Judas became the godless, good-for-nothing wretch he was because he had a godless, good-for-nothing mother?
0.210	Do you know? I do not.
0.211	What is more to blame for the crowded prisons than mothers?
0.212	Who is more to blame for the crowded houses of ill repute than you are, who let your children gad about the streets with every Tom, Dick and Harry, or keep company with some little jack rabbit whose character would make a black mark on a piece of tar paper?
0.213	I have talked with men in prisons who have damned their mothers to my face.
0.214	Why? They blame their mothers for their being where they are.
0.215	"Take the child and nurse it for me, and I will pay you your wages."
0.216	God pays in joy that is fireproof, famine-proof and devil-proof.
0.217	He will pay you; don't you worry.
0.218	So get your name on God's payroll.
0.219	"Take this child and nurse it for me, and I will pay you your wages."
0.220	If you have not been doing that, then get your name on God's payroll.
0.221	"Take this child and nurse it for me, and I will pay you your wages."
0.222	Then there is your responsibility! It is so great that I do not see how any woman can fail to be a Christian and serve God.
0.223	What do you think God will do if the mother fails?
0.224	I stagger under it.
0.225	What if, through your unfaithfulness, your boy becomes a curse and your daughter a blight?
0.226	What if, through your neglect, that boy becomes a Judas when he might have been a John or a Paul?
0.227	Down in Cincinnati some years ago a mother went to the zoological garden and stood leaning over the bear pit, watching the bears and dropping crumbs and peanuts to them.
0.228	In her arms she held her baby, a year and three months old.
0.229	She was so absorbed in the bears that the baby wriggled out of her arms and fell into the bear pit, and she watched those huge monsters rip it to shreds.
0.230	What a veritable hell it will be all through her life to know that her little one was lost through her own carelessness and neglect!
0.231	"Take this child and raise it for me, and I will pay you your wages."
0.232	Will you promise and covenant with God, and with me, and with one another, that from now on you will try, with God's help, to do better than you ever have done in raising your children for God?
0.233	"I once read the story of an angel who stole out of heaven and came to this world one bright, sunshiny day; he roamed through field, forest, city and village, and as the sun went down he preened his wings for the return flight.
0.234	The angel said: "Now that my visit is over, before I return I must gather some mementos of my trip."
0.235	He looked at the beautiful flowers in the garden and said, "How lovely and fragrant," and he plucked the rarest roses, made a bouquet, and said: "I see nothing more beautiful and fragrant than these flowers."
0.236	The angel looked farther and saw a bright-eyed, rosy-cheeked child, and said: "That baby is prettier than the flowers; I will take that, too." And looking behind to the cradle, he saw a mother's love pouring out over her baby like a gushing spring, and the angel said: "The mother's love is the most beautiful thing I have seen!
0.237	I will take that, too."
0.238	And with these three treasures the heavenly messenger winged his flight to the pearly gates, saying: "Before I go, I must examine the mementos of my trip to the earth."
0.239	He looked at the flowers; they had withered.
0.240	He looked at the baby's smile, and it had faded.
0.241	He looked at the mother's love, and it shone in all its original beauty.
0.242	Then he threw away the withered flowers, cast aside the faded smile, and, with the mother's love pressed to his breast, swept through the gates into the city, shouting that the only thing he had found that would keep its fragrance from earth to heaven was a mother's love.
0.243	"Take this child and nurse it for me, and I will pay you your wages."
0.244	When Napoleon Bonaparte was asked, "What do you regard as the greatest need of France?" he replied, "Mothers, mothers, mothers."
0.245	You women can make a hell of a home or a heaven of a home.
0.246	Don't turn your old Gatling-gun tongue loose and rip everybody up, and rip up your husbands and send them out of their homes.
0.247	If I were going to investigate your piety, I would ask the girl who works for you.
0.248	This talk about the land of the free counts for little when the children look like a rummage sale in a secondhand store, with uncombed hair, ripped pants, buttons off and stockings hanging down.
0.249	It does not take the wisdom of truth to see that mother is too busy with her social duties, clubs and so on to pay much attention to the kids.
H:0.65	Mothers of Great Men
0.250	The mother of Nero was a murderess, and it is no wonder that he fiddled while Rome burned.
0.251	The mother of Patrick Henry was eloquent, and that is the reason every schoolboy and schoolgirl knows, "Give me liberty or give me death."
0.252	Coleridge's mother taught him Bible stories from the old Dutch tiles of the fireplace.
0.253	Authority in the home is needed today more than at any time in the history of this nation.
0.254	I have met in the arena of conflict every form of man and beast one could imagine meeting, and I am convinced that neither law nor gospel can make a nation without home authority and home example.
0.255	These two things are needed.
0.256	The boy who has a wholesome home and surroundings, with sensible discipline included, does not often find his way into the reformatory.
0.257	Susanna Wesley was the mother of nineteen children, and she held them for God.
0.258	When asked how she did it, she replied, "By getting hold of their hearts in their youth, and never losing my grip."
0.259	If it had not been for the earnest protests of the mother of George Washington, George Washington would have become a midshipman in the British navy, and the name of that capital over there would have been something else.
0.260	John Randolph said in the House of Representatives, "If it had not been for my godly mother, I, John Randolph, would have been an infidel."
0.261	Gray, who wrote the "Elegy in a Country Churchyard," said he was one of a large family of children who had the misfortune to outlive their mother.
0.262	And I believe the ideal mother is the product of a civilization that rose from the manger of Bethlehem.
0.263	I am sure there is not an angel in heaven who would not be glad to come to earth and be honored with motherhood, if God would grant that privilege.
0.264	What a grand thing it must be, at the end of your earthly career, to look back upon a noble and godly life, knowing that you did all you could to help leave this old world to God, that you made your contributions in tears and in prayers, and that you taught your offspring to be God-fearing, so that when you were gone you would go on reproducing your noble character in your children.
0.265	I believe in blood; I believe in good blood, bad blood, honest blood and thieving blood; in heroic blood and cowardly blood; in virtuous blood, in licentious blood, in drinking blood and in sober blood.
0.266	The lips of the Hapsburgs tell of licentiousness; those of the Stuarts tell of cruelty, bigotry and sensuality, from Mary, Queen of Scots, down to Charles the First and Charles the Second, and James the First—who showed the world what your fool of a Scotsman can be when he is a fool—down to King James the Second.
0.267	Scottish blood stands for stubbornness.
0.268	They are full of stick-to-itiveness.
0.269	I know; Mrs. Sunday is full-blooded Scottish.
0.270	English blood speaks of reverence for the English.
0.271	That is shown by the fact that England recently spent $50,000,000 to put a crown on George's head.
0.272	Danish blood tells of a love of the sea.
0.273	Welsh blood tells of religious fervor and zeal for God.
0.274	Jewish blood tells of a love of money, from the days of Abraham down until now.
0.275	You may have read this story: down in New York there was a woman who said to her drunken son, "Let's go down to the police court and have the judge send you over to the island for a few weeks.
0.276	Maybe you will straighten up then, and I can have some respect for you again."
0.277	Down they went to the police court and appeared before the judge.
0.278	He asked who would make the charge, and the mother sprang forward with the words on her lips.
0.279	Then she stopped short, turned to her son and, throwing her arms around his neck, cried out, "I can't!
0.280	I can't! He is my son; I love him, and I can't."
0.281	Then she fell dead at his feet.
0.282	As dearly as she loved her drunken, bloated, loafing son, she could not stand in judgment over him.
