H:0.0	To the Reader:
0.1	Nothing but the strongest conviction, not only that what is set forth here is “the truth as it is in Jesus,” but also that I am absolutely bound to declare this truth to all the world, could have persuaded me openly to oppose the views of those whom I esteem for their work’s sake: at whose feet may I be found in the day of the Lord Jesus!
0.2	Should anyone believe it his duty to reply to this, I have only one request to make: let whatever you do be done from the heart, in love, and in the spirit of meekness.
0.3	Let your very disputing show that you have “put on, as the elect of God, a heart of mercy, gentleness, patience,” so that even at this time it may be said, “See how these Christians love one another!”
0.4	Whereas a pamphlet entitled “Free Grace Indeed” has been published against this sermon, this is to inform the publisher that I cannot answer his tract until he appears to be more in earnest.
0.5	For I dare not speak of “the deep things of God” in the spirit of a prize-fighter or a stage-player.
0.6	“He who did not spare his own Son, but handed him over for us all, how shall he not also with him freely give us all things?” Romans 8:32
0.7	1. How freely God loves the world!
0.8	While we were still sinners, “Christ died for the ungodly.”
0.9	While we were “dead in our sin,” God “did not spare his own Son, but handed him over for us all.”
0.10	And how freely with him does he “give us all things”!
0.11	Truly, FREE GRACE is all in all!
0.12	2. The grace or love of God, from which our salvation comes, is FREE IN ALL, and FREE FOR ALL.
0.13	3. First. It is free in all to whom it is given.
0.14	It does not depend on any power or merit in man; no, not in any degree, neither in whole nor in part.
0.15	It does not in any way depend either on the good works or the righteousness of the receiver; not on anything he has done, or anything he is.
0.16	It does not depend on his efforts.
0.17	It does not depend on his good dispositions, or good desires, or good purposes and intentions; for all these flow from the free grace of God; they are only the streams, not the fountain.
0.18	They are the fruits of free grace, and not the root.
0.19	They are not the cause, but the effects of it.
0.20	Whatever good is in man, or is done by man, God is the author and doer of it.
0.21	Thus his grace is free in all; that is, in no way depending on any power or merit in man, but on God alone, who freely gave us his own Son, and “with him freely gives us all things.”
0.22	4. But it is free for ALL, as well as IN ALL.
0.23	To this some have answered, “No: it is free only for those whom God has ordained to life; and they are but a little flock.
0.24	The greater part of mankind God has ordained to death; and it is not free for them.
0.25	Them God hates; and therefore, before they were born, he decreed that they should die eternally.
0.26	And this he decreed absolutely; because such was his good pleasure; because it was his sovereign will.
0.27	Accordingly, they are born for this: to be destroyed body and soul in hell.
0.28	And they grow up under the irrevocable curse of God, without any possibility of redemption; for what grace God gives, he gives only for this: to increase, not prevent, their damnation.”
0.29	5. This is that decree of predestination.
0.30	But I think I hear someone say, “This is not the predestination which I hold: I hold only the election of grace.
0.31	What I believe is no more than this: that God, before the foundation of the world, elected a certain number of men to be justified, sanctified, and glorified.
0.32	Now, all these will be saved, and no one else; for the rest of mankind God leaves to themselves: so they follow the imaginations of their own hearts, which are only evil continually, and, growing worse and worse, are at length justly punished with everlasting destruction.”
0.33	6. Is this all the predestination which you hold?
0.34	Consider; perhaps this is not all.
0.35	Do you not believe that God ordained them to this very thing? If so, you believe the whole decree; you hold predestination in the full sense which has been described above.
0.36	But it may be you think you do not.
0.37	Do you not, then, believe that God hardens the hearts of those who perish? Do you not believe that he (literally) hardened Pharaoh’s heart, and that for this end he raised him up, or created him?
0.38	Why, this amounts to exactly the same thing.
0.39	If you believe that Pharaoh, or any one man on earth, was created for this end—to be damned—you hold all that has been said of predestination.
0.40	And there is no need for you to add that God backs up his decree, which is supposed to be unchangeable and irresistible, by hardening the hearts of those vessels of wrath whom that decree had previously fitted for destruction.
0.41	7. Well, but it may be you do not believe even this; you do not hold any decree of reprobation; you do not think God decrees any man to be damned, nor hardens him, nor irresistibly fits him for damnation; you only say, “God eternally decreed that, all being dead in sin, he would say to some of the dry bones, Live, and to others he would not; that, consequently, these should be made alive, and those remain in death—these should glorify God by their salvation, and those by their destruction.”
0.42	8. Is this not what you mean by the election of grace?
0.43	If it is, I would ask one or two questions: Are any who are not thus elected saved? Or have any been, from the foundation of the world?
0.44	Is it possible for any man to be saved unless he is thus elected?
0.45	If you say, “No,” you are just where you were; you have not moved one hair’s breadth farther; you still believe that, as a consequence of an unchangeable, irresistible decree of God, the greater part of mankind remain in death, without any possibility of redemption, inasmuch as no one can save them but God, and he will not save them.
0.46	You believe he has absolutely decreed not to save them; and what is this but decreeing to damn them?
0.47	It is, in effect, neither more nor less; it comes to the same thing; for if you are dead, and altogether unable to make yourself alive, then, if God has absolutely decreed that he will make only others alive, and not you, he has absolutely decreed your everlasting death; you are absolutely consigned to damnation.
0.48	So then, though you use softer words than some, you mean the very same thing; and God’s decree concerning the election of grace, according to your account of it, amounts to neither more nor less than what others call God’s decree of reprobation.
0.49	9. Call it therefore by whatever name you please—election, preterition, predestination, or reprobation—it comes in the end to the same thing.
0.50	The sense of them all is plainly this: by virtue of an eternal, unchangeable, irresistible decree of God, one part of mankind are infallibly saved, and the rest infallibly damned; it being impossible that any of the former should be damned, or that any of the latter should be saved.
0.51	10. But if this is so, then all preaching is in vain.
0.52	It is needless to those who are elected; for they, whether with preaching or without it, will infallibly be saved.
0.53	Therefore the purpose of preaching—to save souls—is void with regard to them; and it is useless to those who are not elected, for they cannot possibly be saved: they, whether with preaching or without it, will infallibly be damned.
0.54	The purpose of preaching is therefore void with regard to them likewise; so that in either case our preaching is in vain, as your hearing is also in vain.
0.55	11. This, then, is a plain proof that the doctrine of predestination is not a doctrine of God, because it makes void the ordinance of God; and God is not divided against himself.
0.56	A second is that it directly tends to destroy that holiness which is the aim of all the ordinances of God.
0.57	I do not say that none who hold it are holy (for God is of tender mercy to those who are unavoidably entangled in errors of any kind); but that the doctrine itself—that every man is either elected or not elected from eternity, and that the one must inevitably be saved, and the other inevitably damned—has a manifest tendency to destroy holiness in general; for it wholly takes away those first motives to pursue it which are so frequently set forth in Scripture: the hope of future reward and the fear of punishment, the hope of heaven and the fear of hell.
0.58	That these shall go away into everlasting punishment, and those into life eternal, is no motive to struggle for life to him who believes his lot is already cast; it is not reasonable for him to do so, if he thinks he is unalterably sentenced either to life or to death.
0.59	You will say, “But he does not know whether it is life or death.”
0.60	What then? This does not help the matter; for if a sick man knows that he must unavoidably die, or unavoidably recover, though he does not know which, it is unreasonable for him to take any medicine at all.
0.61	He might justly say (and so I have heard some speak, both in bodily sickness and in spiritual), “If I am ordained to life, I shall live; if to death, I shall die; so I need not trouble myself about it.”
0.62	So directly does this doctrine tend to shut the very gate of holiness in general—to hinder unholy men from ever approaching it, or striving to enter in by it.
0.63	12. Just as directly does this doctrine tend to destroy several particular branches of holiness.
0.64	Such are meekness and love—love, I mean, of our enemies—of the evil and unthankful.
0.65	I do not say that none who hold it have meekness and love (for as is the power of God, so is his mercy); but that it naturally tends to inspire, or increase, a sharpness or eagerness of temper which is quite contrary to the meekness of Christ, as then especially appears when they are opposed on this point.
0.66	And it just as naturally inspires contempt or coldness towards those whom we suppose to be outcasts from God.
0.67	“Oh, but,” you say,
0.68	“I suppose no particular man to be a reprobate.”
0.69	You mean you would not if you could help it: but you cannot help sometimes applying your general doctrine to particular persons; the enemy of souls will apply it for you.
0.70	You know how often he has done so.
0.71	But you rejected the thought with abhorrence.
0.72	True; as soon as you could; but how it soured and sharpened your spirit in the meantime! You know well that it was not the spirit of love which you then felt towards that poor sinner, whom you supposed or suspected, whether you would or not, to have been hated by God from eternity.
0.73	13. Thirdly. This doctrine tends to destroy the comfort of religion, the happiness of Christianity.
0.74	This is evident as to all those who believe themselves to be reprobated, or who only suspect or fear it.
0.75	All the great and precious promises are lost to them; they give them no ray of comfort: for they are not the elect of God; therefore they have neither lot nor portion in them.
0.76	This is an effective bar to their finding any comfort or happiness, even in that religion whose ways are designed to be “ways of pleasantness, and all her paths peace.”
0.77	14. And as to you who believe yourselves to be the elect of God, what is your happiness?
0.78	I hope, not a notion, a speculative belief, a bare opinion of any kind; but a felt possession of God in your heart, worked in you by the Holy Spirit, or the witness of God’s Spirit with your spirit that you are a child of God.
0.79	This, otherwise called “the full assurance of faith,” is the true ground of a Christian’s happiness.
0.80	And it does indeed imply a full assurance that all your past sins are forgiven, and that you are now a child of God.
0.81	But it does not necessarily imply a full assurance of our future perseverance.
0.82	I do not say this is never joined to it, but that it is not necessarily implied in it; for many have the one who do not have the other.
0.83	15. Now, experience shows this witness of the Spirit to be much obstructed by this doctrine; and not only in those who, believing themselves reprobated, thrust it far from them by this belief, but even in those who have tasted of that good gift, who yet have soon lost it again, and fallen back into doubts, and fears, and darkness—horrible darkness, that might be felt!
0.84	And I appeal to any of you who hold this doctrine to say, between God and your own hearts, whether you do not often have a return of doubts and fears concerning your election or perseverance!
0.85	If you ask, “Who does not?”
0.86	I answer, Very few of those who hold this doctrine; but many, very many, of those who do not hold it, in all parts of the earth—many of these have enjoyed the uninterrupted witness of his Spirit, the continual light of his countenance, from the moment in which they first believed, for many months or years, to this day.
0.87	16. That assurance of faith which these enjoy excludes all doubt and fear. It excludes all kinds of doubt and fear concerning their future perseverance, though it is not properly, as was said before, an assurance of what is future, but only of what now is.
0.88	And this does not need for its support a speculative belief that whoever is once ordained to life must live; for it is worked from hour to hour by the mighty power of God, “by the Holy Spirit who is given to them.”
0.89	And therefore that doctrine is not of God, because it tends to obstruct, if not destroy, this great work of the Holy Spirit, from which flows the chief comfort of religion, the happiness of Christianity.
0.90	17. Again: how uncomfortable a thought is this, that thousands and millions of men, without any preceding offence or fault of theirs, were unchangeably doomed to everlasting burnings!
0.91	How especially uncomfortable must it be to those who have put on Christ! To those who, being filled with a heart of mercy, tenderness, and compassion, could even “wish themselves accursed for their brethren’s sake”!
0.92	18. Fourthly. This uncomfortable doctrine directly tends to destroy our zeal for good works.
0.93	And this it does, first, as it naturally tends (according to what was observed before) to destroy our love for the greater part of mankind, namely, the evil and unthankful.
0.94	For whatever lessens our love must go far to lessen our desire to do them good.
0.95	This it does, secondly, as it cuts off one of the strongest motives to all acts of bodily mercy, such as feeding the hungry, clothing the naked, and the like—namely, the hope of saving their souls from death.
0.96	For what does it profit to relieve the earthly needs of those who are just dropping into eternal fire?
0.97	“Well; but run and snatch them as brands out of the fire.” No, this you suppose impossible.
0.98	They were appointed to it, you say, from eternity, before they had done either good or evil. You believe it is the will of God that they should die.
0.99	And “who has resisted his will?”
0.100	But you say you do not know whether these are elected or not.
0.101	What then? If you know they are the one or the other—that they are either elected or not elected—all your labour is void and vain.
0.102	In either case, your advice, reproof, or exhortation is as needless and useless as our preaching.
0.103	It is needless to those who are elected; for they will infallibly be saved without it.
0.104	It is useless to those who are not elected; for with or without it they will infallibly be damned; therefore you cannot, consistently with your principles, take any pains about their salvation.
0.105	Consequently, those principles directly tend to destroy your zeal for good works; for all good works, but particularly for the greatest of all, the saving of souls from death.
0.106	19. But, fifthly, this doctrine not only tends to destroy Christian holiness, happiness, and good works, but has also a direct and manifest tendency to overthrow the whole Christian Revelation.
0.107	The point which the wisest of the modern unbelievers most diligently labour to prove is that the Christian Revelation is not necessary.
0.108	They know well that, if they could once show this, the conclusion would be too plain to be denied: “If it is not necessary, it is not true.” Now, this fundamental point you give up.
0.109	For, supposing that eternal, unchangeable decree, one part of mankind must be saved though the Christian Revelation were not in existence, and the other part of mankind must be damned notwithstanding that Revelation.
0.110	And what more would an unbeliever desire?
0.111	You allow him all he asks.
0.112	In thus making the gospel unnecessary to all sorts of men, you give up the whole Christian cause.
0.113	“Oh, tell it not in Gath! lest the daughters of the uncircumcised rejoice”; lest the sons of unbelief triumph!
0.114	20. And as this doctrine manifestly and directly tends to overthrow the whole Christian Revelation, so it does the same thing, by plain consequence, in making that Revelation contradict itself.
0.115	For it is grounded on such an interpretation of some texts (more or fewer, it does not matter) as flatly contradicts all the other texts, and indeed the whole scope and tenor of Scripture.
0.116	For instance: the defenders of this doctrine interpret that text of Scripture, “Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated,” as implying that God in a literal sense hated Esau, and all the reprobated, from eternity.
0.117	Now, what can possibly be a more flat contradiction than this, not only to the whole scope and tenor of Scripture, but also to all those particular texts which expressly declare, “God is love”?
0.118	Again: they infer from that text, “I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy” (Romans 4:15), that God is love only to some men, namely, the elect, and that he has mercy for those only; flatly contrary to which is the whole tenor of Scripture, as is that express declaration in particular, “The Lord is loving to every man, and his mercy is over all his works.”
0.119	(Psalm 145:9) Again: they infer from that and similar texts, “It is not of the one who wills, nor of the one who runs, but of God who shows mercy,” that he shows mercy only to those whom he had regarded with favour from all eternity.
0.120	No, but who is replying against God now?
0.121	You now contradict the whole oracles of God, which declare throughout, “God is no respecter of persons” (Acts 10:34); “There is no favouritism with him.”
0.122	(Romans 2:11) Again: from that text, “The children being not yet born, and having done neither good nor evil, so that the purpose of God according to election might stand, not by works, but by him who calls, it was said to her,” to Rebecca, “The elder shall serve the younger,” you infer that our being predestinated, or elect, in no way depends on the foreknowledge of God.
0.123	Flatly contrary to this are all the Scriptures, and those in particular: “Elect according to the foreknowledge of God” (1 Peter 1:2); “Those whom he foreknew, he also predestinated” (Romans 8:29).
0.124	21. And “the same Lord over all is rich” in mercy “to all who call upon him” (Romans 10:12). But you say, “No; he is such only to those for whom Christ died.
0.125	And those are not all, but only a few, whom God has chosen out of the world; for he did not die for all, but only for those who were ‘chosen in him before the foundation of the world.’”
0.126	(Ephesians 1:4) Flatly contrary to your interpretation of these scriptures, also, is the whole tenor of the New Testament, as are in particular those texts: “Do not destroy by your food him for whom Christ died” (Romans 14:15)—a clear proof that Christ died not only for those who are saved, but also for those who perish. He is “the Saviour of the world” (John 4:42); he is “the Lamb of God who takes away the sins of the world” (John 1:29); “He is the propitiation, not for our sins only, but also for the sins of the whole world” (1 John 2:2); “He,” the living God, “is the Saviour of all men” (1 Timothy 4:10); “He gave himself a ransom for all” (1 Timothy 2:6); “He tasted death for every man” (Hebrews 2:9).
0.127	22. If you ask, “Why then are not all men saved?” the whole law and the testimony answer, first, not because of any decree of God; not because it is his pleasure that they should die; for, “As I live, says the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of him who dies.”
0.128	(Ezekiel 18:3, 32) Whatever the cause of their perishing may be, it cannot be his will, if the oracles of God are true; for they declare, “He is not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to repentance” (2 Peter 3:9); “He wills that all men should be saved.”
0.129	And they, secondly, declare what the cause is why all men are not saved, namely, that they will not be saved: so our Lord expressly says, “You will not come to me that you might have life.”
0.130	(John 5:40) “The power of the Lord is present to heal” them, but they will not be healed.
0.131	“They reject the counsel,” the merciful counsel, “of God against themselves,” as did their stiff-necked forefathers.
0.132	And therefore they are without excuse; because God would save them, but they will not be saved: this is the condemnation, “How often would I have gathered you together, and you would not!” (Matthew 23:37).
0.133	23. Thus manifestly does this doctrine tend to overthrow the whole Christian Revelation, by making it contradict itself; by giving such an interpretation of some texts as flatly contradicts all the other texts, and indeed the whole scope and tenor of Scripture—an abundant proof that it is not of God.
0.134	But neither is this all: for, seventhly, it is a doctrine full of blasphemy; of such blasphemy as I should dread to mention, except that the honour of our gracious God, and the cause of his truth, will not allow me to be silent.
0.135	In the cause of God, then, and from a sincere concern for the glory of his great name, I will mention a few of the horrible blasphemies contained in this horrible doctrine.
0.136	But first, I must warn every one of you who hears, as you will answer for it at the great day, not to charge me (as some have done) with blaspheming because I mention the blasphemy of others.
0.137	And the more you are grieved with those who blaspheme in this way, see that you “confirm your love towards them” the more, and that your heart’s desire and continual prayer to God be, “Father, forgive them; for they know not what they do!”
0.138	24. This being stated first, let it be observed that this doctrine represents our blessed Lord, “Jesus Christ the righteous,” “the only begotten Son of the Father, full of grace and truth,” as a hypocrite, a deceiver of the people, a man void of common sincerity.
0.139	For it cannot be denied that he everywhere speaks as if he were willing that all men should be saved.
0.140	Therefore, to say he was not willing that all men should be saved is to represent him as a mere hypocrite and dissembler.
0.141	It cannot be denied that the gracious words which came out of his mouth are full of invitations to all sinners.
0.142	To say, then, that he did not intend to save all sinners is to represent him as a gross deceiver of the people.
0.143	You cannot deny that he says, “Come to me, all you who are weary and heavy laden.”
0.144	If, then, you say he calls those who cannot come; those whom he knows to be unable to come; those whom he can make able to come, but will not; how is it possible to describe greater insincerity?
0.145	You represent him as mocking his helpless creatures, by offering what he never intends to give.
0.146	You describe him as saying one thing and meaning another; as pretending a love which he did not have.
0.147	Him, in “whose mouth was no deceit,” you make full of deceit, void of common sincerity—then especially, when, drawing near the city, he wept over it and said, “O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, you who kill the prophets, and stone those who are sent to you; how often would I have gathered your children together—and you would not”; ēthelēsa kai ouk ēthelēsate.
0.148	Now, if you say they would, but he would not, you represent him (and who could bear to hear it?) as weeping crocodile tears; weeping over the prey which he himself had doomed to destruction!
0.149	25. Such blasphemy is this, as one would think might make the ears of a Christian tingle!
0.150	But there is yet more to come; for just as it honours the Son, so does this doctrine honour the Father.
0.151	It destroys all his attributes at once: it overturns his justice, mercy, and truth alike; yes, it represents the most holy God as worse than the devil, as both more false, more cruel, and more unjust.
0.152	More false, because the devil, liar as he is, has never said, “He wills all men to be saved.” More unjust, because the devil cannot, even if he would, be guilty of such injustice as you ascribe to God, when you say that God condemned millions of souls to everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels, for continuing in sin which, for want of that grace he will not give them, they cannot avoid. And more cruel, because that unhappy spirit “seeks rest and finds none,” so that his own restless misery is a kind of temptation to him to tempt others.
0.153	But God rests in his high and holy place; so that to suppose him, of his own mere impulse, of his pure will and pleasure, happy as he is, to doom his creatures, whether they will or not, to endless misery, is to impute to him such cruelty as we cannot impute even to the great enemy of God and man.
0.154	It is to represent the high God (he who has ears to hear, let him hear!) as more cruel, false, and unjust than the devil!
0.155	26. This is the blasphemy clearly contained in the horrible decree of predestination!
0.156	And here I plant my foot.
0.157	On this I take issue with every defender of it.
0.158	You represent God as worse than the devil; more false, more cruel, more unjust.
0.159	But you say you will prove it by Scripture.
0.160	Stop! What will you prove by Scripture? That God is worse than the devil?
0.161	It cannot be. Whatever that Scripture proves, it can never prove this, whatever its true meaning may be.
0.162	This cannot be its true meaning.
0.163	Do you ask, “What is its true meaning, then?”
0.164	If I say, “I do not know,” you have gained nothing; for there are many scriptures whose true sense neither you nor I shall know until death is swallowed up in victory.
0.165	But this I know: it would be better to say it had no sense at all than to say it had such a sense as this.
0.166	It cannot mean, whatever else it may mean, that the God of truth is a liar.
0.167	Let it mean what it will, it cannot mean that the Judge of all the world is unjust.
0.168	No scripture can mean that God is not love, or that his mercy is not over all his works; that is, whatever else it may prove, no scripture can prove predestination.
0.169	27. This is the blasphemy for which (however much I love the persons who assert it) I abhor the doctrine of predestination, a doctrine on the supposition of which, if one could possibly suppose it for a moment (call it election, reprobation, or what you please, for all comes to the same thing), one might say to our adversary the devil, “You fool, why do you roar about any longer?
0.170	Your lying in wait for souls is as needless and useless as our preaching.
0.171	Do you not hear that God has taken your work out of your hands, and that he does it much more effectively?
0.172	You, with all your principalities and powers, can only assault us in such a way that we may resist you; but He can irresistibly destroy both body and soul in hell!
0.173	You can only entice; but his unchangeable decree, to leave thousands of souls in death, compels them to continue in sin until they drop into everlasting burnings.
0.174	You tempt; He forces us to be damned; for we cannot resist his will.
0.175	You fool, why do you go about any longer, seeking whom you may devour?
0.176	Do you not hear that God is the devouring lion, the destroyer of souls, the murderer of men? Moloch caused only children to pass through the fire, and that fire was soon quenched; or, the corruptible body being consumed, its torment was at an end; but God, you are told, by his eternal decree, fixed before they had done good or evil, causes not only children a span long, but the parents also, to pass through the fire of hell, the ‘fire which shall never be quenched’; and the body which is cast into it, being now incorruptible and immortal, will be ever consuming and never consumed, but ‘the smoke of their torment,’ because it is God’s good pleasure, ‘ascends up for ever and ever.’”
0.177	28. Oh, how the enemy of God and man would rejoice to hear that these things were so!
0.178	How he would cry aloud and not hold back!
0.179	How he would lift up his voice and say, “To your tents, O Israel!
0.180	Flee from the face of this God, or you will utterly perish!
0.181	But where will you flee?
0.182	Into heaven? He is there. Down to hell?
0.183	He is there also.
0.184	You cannot flee from an omnipresent, almighty tyrant.
0.185	And whether you flee or stay, I call heaven, his throne, and earth, his footstool, to witness against you: you shall perish, you shall die eternally.
0.186	Sing, O hell, and rejoice, you who are under the earth!
0.187	For God, even the mighty God, has spoken, and devoted to death thousands of souls, from the rising of the sun to its going down!
0.188	Here, O death, is your sting!
0.189	They shall not, cannot escape; for the mouth of the Lord has spoken it.
0.190	Here, O grave, is your victory! Nations yet unborn, before ever they have done good or evil, are doomed never to see the light of life, but you shall gnaw upon them for ever and ever!
0.191	Let all those morning stars sing together who fell with Lucifer, son of the morning!
0.192	Let all the sons of hell shout for joy!
0.193	For the decree is passed, and who shall annul it?”
0.194	29. Yes, the decree is passed; and so it was before the foundation of the world.
0.195	But what decree? Even this: “I will set before the sons of men ‘life and death, blessing and cursing.’
0.196	And the soul that chooses life shall live, as the soul that chooses death shall die.”
0.197	This decree, by which “those whom God foreknew, he predestinated,” was indeed from everlasting; this decree, by which all who allow Christ to make them alive are “elect according to the foreknowledge of God,” now stands fast, even as the moon, and as the faithful witnesses in heaven; and when heaven and earth pass away, yet this shall not pass away; for it is as unchangeable and eternal as is the being of God who gave it.
0.198	This decree yields the strongest encouragement to abound in all good works and in all holiness; and it is a wellspring of joy, and of happiness also, to our great and endless comfort.
0.199	This is worthy of God; it is in every way consistent with all the perfections of his nature.
0.200	It gives us the noblest view of his justice, mercy, and truth alike.
0.201	With this agrees the whole scope of the Christian Revelation, as well as all its parts.
0.202	To this Moses and all the Prophets bear witness, and our blessed Lord and all his Apostles. Thus Moses, in the name of his Lord: “I call heaven and earth to record against you this day, that I have set before you life and death, blessing and cursing; therefore choose life, that you and your offspring may live.”
0.203	Thus Ezekiel (to cite one prophet for all): “The soul that sins, it shall die: the son shall not bear” eternally “the iniquity of the father.
0.204	The righteousness of the righteous shall be upon him, and the wickedness of the wicked shall be upon him.”
0.205	(Ezekiel 18:20) Thus our blessed Lord: “If any man is thirsty, let him come to me and drink.”
0.206	(John 7:37) Thus his great Apostle, St. Paul (Acts 17:30): “God commands all men everywhere to repent”—“all men everywhere”: every man in every place, without any exception either of place or person.
0.207	Thus St. James: “If any of you lacks wisdom, let him ask of God, who gives to all men liberally, and does not reproach, and it shall be given him.”
0.208	(James 1:5) Thus St. Peter (2 Peter 3:9): “The Lord is not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to repentance.”
0.209	And thus St. John: “If any man sins, we have an Advocate with the Father; and he is the propitiation for our sins; and not for ours only, but for the sins of the whole world.”
0.210	(1 John 2:1, 2)
0.211	30. Oh, hear this, you who forget God!
0.212	You cannot lay your death at his door! “‘Have I any pleasure at all that the wicked should die?’ says the Lord God.”
0.213	(Ezekiel 18:23ff.) “Repent, and turn from all your transgressions; so iniquity shall not be your ruin.
0.214	Cast away from you all your transgressions by which you have transgressed—for why will you die, O house of Israel?
0.215	For I have no pleasure in the death of him who dies, says the Lord God.
0.216	Therefore turn yourselves, and live.”
0.217	“As I live, says the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked.—Turn, turn from your evil ways; for why will you die, O house of Israel?” (Ezekiel 33:11)
