0.1	“Though I speak with the tongues of men and of angels, and do not have charity, I have become like sounding brass or a tinkling cymbal.
0.2	And though I have the gift of prophecy, and understand all mysteries and all knowledge, and though I have all faith, so that I could remove mountains, and do not have charity, I am nothing.
0.3	And though I give all my goods to feed the poor, and give my body to be burned, and do not have charity, it profits me nothing.”
0.4	1 Cor. 13:1–3.
0.5	We know that “all Scripture is given by inspiration of God,” and is therefore true and right concerning all things.
0.6	But we know, likewise, that there are some Scriptures which more immediately commend themselves to every man’s conscience.
0.7	In this rank we may place the passage before us; there are scarcely any who object to it.
0.8	On the contrary, people in general very readily appeal to it.
0.9	Nothing is more common than to find even those who deny the authority of the Holy Scriptures nevertheless affirming, “This is my religion: that which is described in the thirteenth chapter of Corinthians.”
0.10	Indeed, even a Jew, Dr. Nunes, a Spanish physician then settled at Savannah, in Georgia, used to say with great earnestness, “Paul of Tarsus was one of the finest writers I have ever read.
0.11	I wish the thirteenth chapter of his first letter to the Corinthians were written in letters of gold.
0.12	And I wish every Jew would carry it with him wherever he went.”
0.13	He judged (and in this he certainly judged right) that this single chapter contained the whole of true religion.
0.14	It contains “whatever things are just, whatever things are pure, whatever things are lovely: if there is any virtue, if there is any praise,” it is all contained in this.
0.15	In order to see this in the clearest light, we may consider,
0.16	I. What the charity here spoken of is;
0.17	II. What those things are which are usually put in its place.
0.18	We may then,
0.19	III. Observe that neither any of them, nor all of them put together, can make up for the lack of it.
0.20	I. 1. We are, first, to consider what this charity is.
0.21	What is its nature, and what are its properties?
0.22	St. Paul’s word is agape, exactly corresponding to the plain English word love.
0.23	And accordingly it is so rendered in all the old translations of the Bible.
0.24	So it stood in William Tyndale’s Bible, which, I suppose, was the first English translation of the whole Bible.
0.25	So it was also in the Bible published by the authority of King Henry VIII.
0.26	So it was likewise in all the editions of the Bible that were successively published in England during the reigns of King Edward VI, Queen Elizabeth, and King James I. Indeed, so it is found in the Bibles of King Charles I’s reign; I believe, to the end of it.
0.27	The first Bibles I have seen in which the word was changed were those printed by Roger Daniel and John Field, printers to the Parliament, in the year 1649. Hence it seems probable that the alteration was made during the sitting of the Long Parliament; probably it was then that the Latin word charity was put in the place of the English word love.
0.28	It was in an unhappy hour that this alteration was made; its ill effects remain to this day; and these may be observed not only among the poor and illiterate—not only do thousands of ordinary men and women understand the word charity no more than they do the original Greek—but the same miserable mistake has spread itself among men of education and learning.
0.29	Thousands of these are misled by it, and imagine that the charity treated of in this chapter refers chiefly, if not wholly, to outward actions, and means little more than almsgiving!
0.30	I have heard many sermons preached on this chapter, particularly before the University of Oxford.
0.31	And I never heard more than one in which its meaning was not totally misrepresented.
0.32	But had the old and proper word love been retained, there would have been no room for misrepresentation.
0.33	2. But what kind of love is it of which the Apostle is speaking throughout the chapter?
0.34	Many persons of eminent learning and piety take it to be the love of God.
0.35	But from reading the whole chapter countless times, and considering it in every light, I am thoroughly persuaded that what St. Paul is directly speaking of here is the love of our neighbour.
0.36	I believe whoever carefully weighs the whole drift of his discourse will be fully convinced of this.
0.37	But it must be granted that it is such a love of our neighbour as can only spring from the love of God.
0.38	And from where does this love of God flow? Only from that faith which is the work of God; and whoever has it has a direct evidence that God was in Christ, reconciling the world to himself.
0.39	When this is particularly applied to his heart, so that he can say with humble boldness, The life which I now live, I live by faith in the Son of God, who loved me and gave himself for me—then, and not until then, the love of God is poured out in his heart.
0.40	And this love sweetly constrains him to love every child of man with the love which is spoken of here; not with a love of esteem or of delight—for this can have no place with regard to those who are (if not his personal enemies, yet) enemies to God and to their own souls—but with a love of benevolence, of tender good will to all the souls that God has made.
0.41	3. But it may be asked, “If there is no true love of our neighbour but that which springs from the love of God, and if the love of God flows from no other fountain than faith in the Son of God, does it not follow that the whole heathen world is excluded from all possibility of salvation?
0.42	Seeing they are cut off from faith; for faith comes by hearing, and how shall they hear without a preacher?”
0.43	I answer: St. Paul’s words, spoken on another occasion, apply to this: “What the law speaks, it speaks to those who are under the law.”
0.44	Accordingly, that sentence, “He who does not believe shall be damned,” is spoken of those to whom the Gospel is preached. Others it does not concern; and we are not required to determine anything concerning their final state.
0.45	How it will please God, the Judge of all, to deal with them, we may leave to God himself.
0.46	But this we know: that he is not the God of the Christians only, but the God of the heathen also; that he is “rich in mercy to all who call upon him,” according to the light they have; and that “in every nation he who fears God and works righteousness is accepted by him.”
0.47	4. But to return.
0.48	This is the nature of that love of which the Apostle is speaking here.
0.49	But what are its properties—the fruits which are inseparable from it?
0.50	The Apostle lists many of them; but the principal ones are these.
0.51	First, “Love is not puffed up.”
0.52	As is the measure of love, so is the measure of humility.
0.53	Nothing humbles the soul so deeply as love: it casts out all “high conceits, engendering pride”; all arrogance and overweening; it makes us little, and poor, and base, and vile in our own eyes.
0.54	It abases us both before God and man; makes us willing to be the least of all and the servants of all, and teaches us to say, “A mote in the sunbeam is little, but I am infinitely less in the presence of God.”
0.55	5. Secondly, “Love is not provoked.” Our present English translation renders it, “is not easily provoked.”
0.56	But how did the word easily come in?
0.57	There is not a trace of it in the text: the words of the Apostle are simply these, ou paraxynetai.
0.58	Is it not probable that it was inserted by the translators with a design to excuse St. Paul, for fear his practice should appear to contradict his doctrine?
0.59	For we read (Acts 15:36 and following), “And some days after, Paul said to Barnabas, Let us go again and visit our brethren in every city where we have preached the word of the Lord, and see how they are doing.
0.60	And Barnabas determined to take with them John, whose surname was Mark.
0.61	But Paul did not think it good to take with them him who had departed from the work.
0.62	And the contention was so sharp between them that they parted from one another; and so Barnabas took Mark and sailed to Cyprus; and Paul chose Silas and departed, being recommended by the brethren to the grace of God.
0.63	And he went through Syria and Cilicia, confirming the churches.”
0.64	6. Would not anyone think, on reading these words, that they were both equally sharp?
0.65	That Paul was just as hot as Barnabas, and as lacking in love as he?
0.66	But the text says no such thing, as will be plain if we consider, first, the occasion.
0.67	When St. Paul proposed that they should “again visit the brethren in every city where they had preached the word,” so far they were agreed.
0.68	“And Barnabas determined to take with them John,” because he was his sister’s son, without receiving or asking St. Paul’s advice.
0.69	“But Paul did not think it good to take him with them who had departed from them from Pamphylia”—whether through sloth or cowardice—“and had not gone with them to the work.”
0.70	And undoubtedly he thought right; he had reason on his side.
0.71	The following words are egento oun paroxysmos, literally, “and there was a fit of anger.”
0.72	It does not say it was in St. Paul: probably it was in Barnabas alone, who thus made up for the lack of reason with passion, “so that they parted from one another.”
0.73	And Barnabas, resolved to have his own way, did as his nephew had done before—“departed from the work”—“took Mark with him, and sailed to Cyprus.”
0.74	But Paul went on with his work, “being recommended by the brethren to the grace of God,” which Barnabas seems not to have waited for.
0.75	“And he went through Syria and Cilicia, confirming the churches.”
0.76	From the whole account, it does not appear that St. Paul was at fault in any way; that he either felt any temper, or spoke any word, contrary to the law of love.
0.77	Therefore, not being at fault in anything, he does not need any excuse.
0.78	7. Certainly he who is full of love is “gentle towards all men.”
0.79	He “in meekness instructs those who oppose themselves”—who oppose what he loves most, even the truth of God, or that holiness without which no one shall see the Lord—not knowing but that “God perhaps may bring them to the knowledge of the truth.”
0.80	However provoked, he does “not return evil for evil, or reviling for reviling.”
0.81	Yes, he “blesses those who curse him, and does good to those who spitefully use him and persecute him.”
0.82	He “is not overcome by evil, but” always “overcomes evil with good.”
0.83	8. Thirdly, “Love is longsuffering.”
0.84	It endures not merely a few affronts, reproaches, and injuries, but all things which God is pleased to permit either men or devils to inflict.
0.85	It arms the soul with inviolable patience—not harsh, stoical patience, but yielding like the air, which, making no resistance to the stroke, receives no harm from it.
0.86	The lover of mankind remembers Him who suffered for us, “leaving us an example, that we might tread in his steps.”
0.87	Accordingly, “if his enemy hungers, he feeds him; if he thirsts, he gives him drink”; and by so doing he “heaps coals of fire,” of melting love, upon his head.
0.88	“And many waters cannot quench this love; neither can the floods” of ingratitude “drown it.”
0.89	II. 1. We are, secondly, to inquire what those things are which, it is commonly supposed, will supply the place of love.
0.90	And the first of these is eloquence: a faculty of talking well, particularly on religious subjects.
0.91	Men are generally inclined to think well of one who talks well.
0.92	If he speaks properly and fluently of God and the things of God, who can doubt that he is in God’s favour?
0.93	And it is very natural for him to think well of himself; to have as favourable an opinion of himself as others have.
0.94	2. But men of reflection are not satisfied with this: they are not content with a flood of words; they prefer thinking to talking, and judge that one who knows much is far preferable to one who talks much.
0.95	And it is certain that knowledge is an excellent gift of God—particularly knowledge of the Holy Scriptures, in which are contained all the depths of divine knowledge and wisdom.
0.96	Hence it is generally thought that a man of much knowledge, knowledge of Scripture in particular, must not only be in the favour of God, but also enjoy a high degree of it.
0.97	3. But men of deeper reflection are apt to say, “I lay no stress on any other knowledge but the knowledge of God by faith.
0.98	Faith is the only knowledge which, in the sight of God, is of great price.
0.99	‘We are saved by faith’—by faith alone: this is the one thing needful.
0.100	He who believes, and he alone, shall be saved everlastingly.”
0.101	There is much truth in this: it is unquestionably true that “we are saved by faith”; consequently, that “he who believes shall be saved, and he who does not believe shall be damned.”
0.102	4. But some men will say, with the Apostle James, “Show me your faith without your works” (if you can, but indeed it is impossible), “and I will show you my faith by my works.”
0.103	And many are led to think that good works, works of piety and mercy, are of far more consequence than faith itself, and will make up for the lack of every other qualification for heaven.
0.104	Indeed, this seems to be the general sentiment not only of the members of the Church of Rome, but of Protestants also; not of the giddy and thoughtless, but of the serious members of our own Church.
0.105	5. And this cannot be denied; our Lord himself has said, “You shall know them by their fruits”: by their works you know those who believe and those who do not believe.
0.106	But yet it may be doubted whether there is not a surer proof of the sincerity of our faith than even our works, namely, our willingly suffering for righteousness’ sake: especially if, after suffering reproach, and pain, and the loss of friends and possessions, a man gives up life itself; yes, by a shameful and painful death, by giving his body to be burned, rather than give up faith and a good conscience by neglecting his known duty.
0.107	6. It is proper to observe here, first, what a beautiful gradation there is, each step rising above the other, in the listing of those several things which some or other of those who are called Christians, and are usually counted as such, really believe will supply the absence of love.
0.108	St. Paul begins at the lowest point, talking well, and advances step by step, each one rising higher than the one before, until he comes to the highest of all.
0.109	A step above eloquence is knowledge; faith is a step above this.
0.110	Good works are a step above that faith; and even above this is suffering for righteousness’ sake.
0.111	Nothing is higher than this but Christian love: the love of our neighbour, flowing from the love of God.
0.112	7. It may be proper to observe, secondly, that whatever passes for religion in any part of the Christian world (whether it is a part of religion, or no part at all, but either folly, superstition, or wickedness) may with very little difficulty be reduced to one or other of these heads.
0.113	Everything which is supposed to be religion, either by Protestants or by Roman Catholics, and is not, is contained under one or another of these five particulars.
0.114	Make the trial as often as you please with anything that is called religion, but improperly so called, and you will find that the rule holds without any exception.
0.115	III. 1. I am now, in the third place, to demonstrate to all who have ears to hear, who do not harden themselves against conviction, that neither any one of these five qualifications, nor all of them together, will avail anything before God without the love described above.
0.116	In order to do this in the clearest manner, we may consider them one by one.
0.117	And, first, “though I speak with the tongues of men and of angels”—with an eloquence such as was never found in men, concerning the nature, attributes, and works of God, whether of creation or providence; though I were not in this the least bit behind the chief of the apostles, preaching like St. Peter and praying like St. John—yet unless humble, gentle, patient love is the ruling temper of my soul, I am no better, in the judgment of God, “than sounding brass, or a rumbling cymbal.”
0.118	The highest eloquence, therefore, either in private conversation or in public ministry—the brightest talents either for preaching or prayer—if they were not joined with humble, meek, and patient resignation, might sink me the deeper into hell, but will not bring me one step nearer heaven.
0.119	2. A plain instance may illustrate this.
0.120	I knew a young man between fifty and sixty years ago who, over the course of several years, never tried to convince anyone of a religious truth but he was convinced; and he never tried to persuade anyone to take up a religious practice but he was persuaded. What then?
0.121	All that power of convincing speech, all that force of persuasion, if it was not joined with meekness and lowliness, with resignation and patient love, would no more qualify him for the enjoyment of God than a clear voice or a fine complexion.
0.122	No, it would rather procure him a hotter place in everlasting burnings!
0.123	3. Secondly, “Though I have the gift of prophecy”—of foretelling those future events which no creature can foresee—and “though I understand all” the “mysteries” of nature, of providence, and of the word of God, and “have all knowledge” of things, divine or human, that any mortal ever attained to; though I can explain the most mysterious passages of Daniel, of Ezekiel, and of the Revelation—yet if I do not have humility, gentleness, and resignation, “I am nothing” in the sight of God.
0.124	A little before the end of the late war in Flanders, someone who came from there gave us a very strange report.
0.125	I did not know what judgment to form of this, but waited until John Haime should come over, of whose truthfulness I could no more doubt than of his understanding.
0.126	The account he gave was this: “Jonathan Pyrah was a member of our Society in Flanders.
0.127	I knew him for some years, and knew him to be a man of blameless character.
0.128	One day he was summoned to appear before the Board of General Officers.
0.129	One of them said, ‘What is this that we hear about you?
0.130	We hear you have turned prophet, and that you foretell the downfall of the bloody house of Bourbon and the haughty house of Austria.
0.131	We would be glad if you were a real prophet, and if your prophecies came true.
0.132	But what sign do you give to convince us that you are one, and that your predictions will come to pass?’
0.133	He readily answered, ‘Gentlemen, I give you a sign: tomorrow, at twelve o’clock, you shall have such a storm of thunder and lightning as you have never had before since you came into Flanders.
0.134	I give you a second sign: as little as any of you expect any such thing, and as little appearance of it as there is now, you shall have a general engagement with the French within three days.
0.135	I give you a third sign: I shall be ordered to advance in the front line.
0.136	If I am a false prophet, I shall be shot dead at the first volley; but if I am a true prophet, I shall only receive a musket ball in the calf of my left leg.’
0.137	At twelve the next day there was such thunder and lightning as they had never had before in Flanders.
0.138	On the third day, contrary to all expectation, came the general battle of Fontenoy.
0.139	He was ordered to advance in the front line; and at the very first volley he did receive a musket ball in the calf of his left leg.”
0.140	4. And yet all this profited him nothing, either for temporal or for eternal happiness.
0.141	When the war was over, he returned to England; but the story had got there before him, in consequence of which he was sent for by the Countess of St—s and several other persons of rank, who were eager to hear so surprising an account from his own mouth.
0.142	He could not bear so much honour.
0.143	It quite turned his head.
0.144	In a little while he went stark mad.
0.145	And so he continues to this day, still living, as I understand, on Wibsey Moorside, within a few miles of Leeds.
0.146	[At the time of writing this sermon.
0.147	He has since died.]
0.148	5. And what would it profit a man to “have all knowledge,” even that which is infinitely preferable to all other—the knowledge of the Holy Scripture?
0.149	I knew a young man about twenty years ago who was so thoroughly acquainted with the Bible that if he was questioned about any Hebrew word in the Old Testament, or any Greek word in the New, he would tell, after a little pause, not only how often the one or the other occurred in the Bible, but also what it meant in every place.
0.150	His name was Thomas Walsh.
0.151	[His Journal, written by himself, is extant.]
0.152	Such a master of biblical knowledge I never saw before, and never expect to see again.
0.153	Yet if, with all his knowledge, he had been void of love—if he had been proud, passionate, or impatient—he and all his knowledge would have perished together, as surely as he was ever born.
0.154	6. “And though I have all faith, so that I could remove mountains.” The faith which is able to do this cannot be the fruit of vain imagination, a mere madman’s dream, a system of opinions; it must be a real work of God; otherwise it could not have such an effect.
0.155	Yet if this faith does not work by love, if it does not produce universal holiness, if it does not bring forth lowliness, meekness, and resignation, it will profit me nothing.
0.156	This is as certain a truth as any that is delivered in all the oracles of God.
0.157	All faith that is, that ever was, or ever can be, separate from tender benevolence to every child of man—friend or foe, Christian, Jew, heretic, or pagan—separate from gentleness to all men, separate from resignation in all events and contentment in all conditions, is not the faith of a Christian, and will be of no use to us before the face of God.
0.158	7. Hear this, all you who are called Methodists!
0.159	You, of all people living, are most concerned in this.
0.160	You constantly speak of salvation by faith; and you are right in doing so.
0.161	You maintain (one and all) that a man is justified by faith, without the works of the law.
0.162	And you cannot do otherwise without giving up the Bible and betraying your own souls.
0.163	You insist that we are saved by faith; and undoubtedly so we are.
0.164	But consider, meanwhile, that however much faith we have, and however strong our faith may be, it will never save us from hell unless it now saves us from all unholy tempers: from pride, passion, impatience; from all arrogance of spirit, all haughtiness and overbearing; from wrath, anger, bitterness; from discontent, murmuring, fretfulness, peevishness.
0.165	We are of all men most inexcusable if, having been so frequently warned against that strong delusion, we still, while we indulge any of these tempers, congratulate ourselves and dream that we are on the way to heaven!
0.166	8. Fourthly, “Though I give all my goods to the poor”—though I divide all my real and all my personal estate into small portions (so the original word properly signifies), and diligently bestow it on those who, I have reason to believe, are the most proper objects—yet if I am proud, passionate, or discontented, if I give way to any of these tempers, whatever good I may do to others, I do none to my own soul.
0.167	O how pitiable a case this is!
0.168	Who would not grieve that these beneficent men should lose all their labour!
0.169	It is true, many of them have a reward in this world, if not before, then after their death.
0.170	They have costly and pompous funerals.
0.171	They have marble monuments of the most exquisite workmanship.
0.172	They have epitaphs written in the most elegant strain, which extol their virtues to the skies.
0.173	Perhaps they have yearly orations spoken over them, to pass on their memory to all generations.
0.174	So have many founders of religious houses, of colleges, almshouses, and most charitable institutions.
0.175	And it is an accepted rule that no one can exceed in praising the founder of his house, college, or hospital.
0.176	But still, what a poor reward this is!
0.177	Will it add to their comfort or to their misery, suppose (which must be the case if they did not die in faith) that they are in the hands of the devil and his angels?
0.178	What insults, what cutting reproaches, would these occasion from their infernal companions!
0.179	O that they were wise! That all those who are zealous for good works would put them in their proper place; would not imagine they can supply the lack of holy tempers, but take care that the works may spring from them!
0.180	9. How exceedingly strange this must sound in the ears of most of those who are, by the courtesy of England, called Christians!
0.181	But stranger still is that assertion of the Apostle which comes in the last place: “Though I give my body to be burned, and do not have love, it profits me nothing.”
0.182	Though, rather than deny the faith, rather than commit a known sin or omit a known duty, I voluntarily submit to a cruel death—“deliver up my body to be burned”—yet if I am under the power of pride, or anger, or fretfulness, “it profits me nothing.”
0.183	10. Perhaps this may be illustrated by an example.
0.184	We have a remarkable account in the tracts of Dr. Geddes, a doctor of civil law, who was Envoy from Queen Anne to the Court of Portugal in the latter part of her reign.
0.185	He was present at one of those Autos de Fé, “Acts of Faith,” in which the Roman Inquisitors burned heretics alive.
0.186	One of the persons who was then brought out for execution, having been confined in the dungeons of the Inquisition, had not seen the sun for many years.
0.187	It turned out to be a bright, sunny day.
0.188	Looking up, he cried out in surprise, “O how can anyone who sees that glorious luminary worship any but the God who made it!”
0.189	A friar standing by ordered them to run an iron gag through his lips, so that he might speak no more.
0.190	Now, what did that poor man feel within when this order was carried out?
0.191	If he said in his heart, though he could not utter it with his lips, “Father, forgive them, for they do not know what they do,” undoubtedly the angels of God were ready to carry his soul into Abraham’s bosom.
0.192	But if, instead of this, he cherished in his heart the resentment which he could not express with his tongue, then although his body was consumed by the flames, I will not say that his soul went to paradise.
0.193	11. The sum of all that has been observed is this: whatever I speak, whatever I know, whatever I believe, whatever I do, whatever I suffer, if I do not have the faith that works by love, that produces love to God and all mankind, I am not in the narrow way which leads to life, but in the broad road that leads to destruction.
0.194	In other words: whatever eloquence I have; whatever natural or supernatural knowledge; whatever faith I have received from God; whatever works I do, whether of piety or mercy; whatever sufferings I undergo for conscience’ sake, even though I resist to the point of bloodshed—all these things put together, however applauded by men, will avail nothing before God unless I am meek and lowly in heart, and can say in all things, “Not as I will, but as you will!”
0.195	12. We conclude from the whole (and it can never be urged too much, because all the world votes on the other side) that true religion, in its very essence, is nothing short of holy tempers.
0.196	Consequently all other religion, whatever name it bears—whether pagan, Muslim, Jewish, or Christian, and whether Roman Catholic or Protestant, Lutheran or Reformed—without these is lighter than vanity itself.
0.197	13. Let every man, therefore, who has a soul to be saved see that he secures this one point.
0.198	With all his eloquence, his knowledge, his faith, works, and sufferings, let him hold fast this “one thing needful.”
0.199	He who through the power of faith endures to the end in humble, gentle, patient love—he, and he alone, shall, through the merits of Christ, “inherit the kingdom prepared from the foundation of the world.”
