0.1	“Take care that you do not do your alms before people, to be seen by them; otherwise you have no reward from your Father who is in heaven.
0.2	Therefore, when you give alms, do not sound a trumpet before you, as the hypocrites do in the synagogues and in the streets, that they may have glory from people.
0.3	Truly I say to you, they have their reward.
0.4	But when you give alms, do not let your left hand know what your right hand is doing, so that your alms may be in secret; and your Father, who sees in secret, will himself reward you openly.
0.5	And when you pray, you shall not be like the hypocrites; for they love to pray standing in the synagogues and on the corners of the streets, that they may be seen by people.
0.6	Truly I say to you, they have their reward.
0.7	But you, when you pray, go into your inner room, and when you have shut your door, pray to your Father who is in secret; and your Father who sees in secret will reward you openly.
0.8	But when you pray, do not use vain repetitions, as the heathen do; for they think that they will be heard for their much speaking.
0.9	Therefore do not be like them; for your Father knows what things you have need of before you ask him.
0.10	In this manner, therefore, pray: Our Father who is in heaven, hallowed be your name.
0.11	Your kingdom come. Your will be done on earth, as it is in heaven.
0.12	Give us this day our daily bread.
0.13	And forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors.
0.14	And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil; for yours is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory, for ever.
0.15	Amen. For if you forgive people their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive you; but if you do not forgive people their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your trespasses.” Matthew 6:1–15.
0.16	1. In the preceding chapter our Lord has described inward religion in its various branches.
0.17	He has laid before us those dispositions of soul which make up real Christianity; the inward tempers contained in that “holiness without which no one shall see the Lord”; the affections which, when flowing from their proper fountain, from a living faith in God through Christ Jesus, are intrinsically and essentially good, and acceptable to God.
0.18	In this chapter he goes on to show how all our actions likewise, even those that are indifferent in their own nature, may be made holy and good and acceptable to God by a pure and holy intention.
0.19	Whatever is done without this, he declares at length, is of no value before God.
0.20	Whereas whatever outward works are consecrated to God in this way are, in his sight, of great price.
0.21	2. He shows the necessity of this purity of intention, first, with regard to those actions which are usually counted religious, and which indeed are such when performed with a right intention.
0.22	Some of these are commonly called works of piety; the rest, works of charity or mercy.
0.23	Of the latter kind he particularly names almsgiving; of the former, prayer and fasting.
0.24	But the directions given for these are equally to be applied to every work, whether of charity or mercy.
0.25	I. 1. And first, with regard to works of mercy.
0.26	“Take care,” he says, “that you do not do your alms before people, to be seen by them; otherwise you have no reward from your Father who is in heaven.”
0.27	“That you do not do your alms”: although this alone is named, yet every work of charity is included, everything which we give, or speak, or do, by which our neighbour may be benefited; by which another person may receive any advantage, either in body or in soul.
0.28	Feeding the hungry, clothing the naked, entertaining or assisting the stranger, visiting those who are sick or in prison, comforting the afflicted, instructing the ignorant, reproving the wicked, exhorting and encouraging those who do well; and if there is any other work of mercy, it is equally included in this direction.
0.29	2. “Take care that you do not do your alms before people, to be seen by them.” What is forbidden here is not merely doing good in the sight of people; this circumstance alone, that others see what we do, makes the action neither worse nor better; but doing it before people “to be seen by them,” with this view, from this intention only.
0.30	I say, from this intention only; for this may, in some cases, be a part of our intention; we may intend that some of our actions should be seen, and yet they may be acceptable to God.
0.31	We may intend that our light should shine before people, when our conscience bears us witness in the Holy Spirit that our ultimate aim in intending that they should see our good works is “that they may glorify our Father who is in heaven.”
0.32	But take care that you do not do the least thing with a view to your own glory; take care that regard for the praise of people has no place at all in your works of mercy.
0.33	If you seek your own glory, if you have any design to gain the honour that comes from people, whatever is done with this view is worth nothing; it is not done for the Lord; he does not accept it; “you have no reward” for this “from our Father who is in heaven.”
0.34	3. “Therefore when you give alms, do not sound a trumpet before you, as the hypocrites do in the synagogues and in the streets, that they may have praise from people.” The word synagogue here does not mean a place of worship, but any place of public resort, such as the market-place or the exchange.
0.35	It was a common thing among those Jews who were men of large fortunes, particularly among the Pharisees, to have a trumpet sounded before them in the most public parts of the city when they were about to give any considerable alms.
0.36	The pretended reason for this was to call the poor together to receive it; but the real design was that they might have praise from people.
0.37	But do not be like them.
0.38	Do not have a trumpet sounded before you.
0.39	Use no ostentation in doing good.
0.40	Aim at the honour which comes from God alone.
0.41	Those who seek the praise of people have their reward: they shall have no praise from God.
0.42	4. “But when you give alms, do not let your left hand know what your right hand is doing.” This is a proverbial expression, and its meaning is: do it in as secret a manner as possible; as secret as is consistent with doing it at all (for it must not be left undone; miss no opportunity of doing good, whether secretly or openly), and with doing it in the most effective manner.
0.43	For here too an exception is to be made: when you are fully persuaded in your own mind that by not concealing the good which is done, either you yourself will be enabled, or others stirred up, to do the more good, then you may not conceal it; then let your light appear, and “shine to all who are in the house.”
0.44	But unless the glory of God and the good of mankind oblige you to the contrary, act in as private and unobserved a manner as the nature of the thing will allow; “that your alms may be in secret; and your Father who sees in secret will reward you openly”; perhaps in the present world (many instances of this stand recorded in all ages), but infallibly in the world to come, before the general assembly of men and angels.
0.45	II. 1. From works of charity or mercy our Lord proceeds to those which are called works of piety.
0.46	“And when you pray,” he says, “you shall not be like the hypocrites; for they love to pray standing in the synagogues and on the corners of the streets, that they may be seen by people.” “You shall not be like the hypocrites.”
0.47	Hypocrisy, then, or insincerity, is the first thing we are to guard against in prayer.
0.48	Take care not to say what you do not mean.
0.49	Prayer is the lifting up of the heart to God: all words of prayer without this are mere hypocrisy.
0.50	Whenever, therefore, you attempt to pray, see that it is your one design to commune with God, to lift up your heart to him, to pour out your soul before him; not like the hypocrites, who love, or are accustomed, “to pray standing in the synagogues,” the exchange, or market-places, “and on the corners of the streets,” wherever the most people are, “that they may be seen by people.” This was the sole design, the motive and end, of the prayers which they repeated there.
0.51	“Truly I say to you, they have their reward.” They are to expect none from your Father who is in heaven.
0.52	2. But it is not only having an eye to the praise of people that cuts us off from any reward in heaven, that leaves us no room to expect the blessing of God upon our works, whether of piety or of mercy.
0.53	Purity of intention is equally destroyed by a view to any temporal reward whatever.
0.54	If we repeat our prayers, if we attend the public worship of God, if we relieve the poor, with a view to gain or self-interest, it is not one bit more acceptable to God than if it were done with a view to praise.
0.55	Any temporal view, any motive whatever on this side of eternity, any design but that of promoting the glory of God and the happiness of people for God’s sake, makes every action, however fair it may appear to people, an abomination to the Lord.
0.56	3. “But when you pray, go into your inner room, and when you have shut the door, pray to your Father who is in secret.” There is a time when you are to glorify God openly, to pray to him and praise him in the great congregation.
0.57	But when you desire to make your requests known to God more fully and more particularly, whether it is in the evening, or in the morning, or at noon, “go into your inner room and shut the door.”
0.58	Use all the privacy you can.
0.59	(Only do not leave it undone, whether you have any inner room, any privacy, or not. Pray to God, if it is possible, when no one sees but he; but if not, still pray to God.)
0.60	In this way “pray to your Father who is in secret”; pour out your heart before him; “and your Father who sees in secret will reward you openly.”
0.61	4. “But when you pray,” even in secret, “do not use vain repetitions, as the heathen do”; mē battalogēsēte.
0.62	Do not use an abundance of words without any meaning.
0.63	Do not say the same thing over and over again; do not think the fruit of your prayers depends on their length, like the heathen; for they think they will be heard for their much speaking.
0.64	What is reproved here is not simply the length of our prayers, any more than their shortness; but, first, length without meaning; speaking much and meaning little or nothing; the use (not of all repetitions, for our Lord himself prayed three times, repeating the same words, but) of vain repetitions, as the heathen did, reciting the names of their gods over and over; as they do among Christians (commonly so called), and not among the Papists only, who say the same string of prayers over and over without ever feeling what they say: secondly, thinking to be heard for our much speaking, imagining that God measures prayers by their length and is best pleased with those which contain the most words, which sound the longest in his ears.
0.65	These are such instances of superstition and folly as all who are called by the name of Christ should leave to the heathen, to those on whom the glorious light of the gospel has never shone.
0.66	5. Therefore do not be like them. You who have tasted the grace of God in Christ Jesus are thoroughly convinced that your Father knows what things you have need of before you ask him.
0.67	So the purpose of your praying is not to inform God, as though he did not know your wants already; but rather to inform yourselves; to fix the sense of those wants more deeply in your hearts, and the sense of your continual dependence on him who alone is able to supply all your wants.
0.68	It is not so much to move God, who is always more ready to give than you are to ask, as to move yourselves, that you may be willing and ready to receive the good things he has prepared for you.
0.69	III. 1. After having taught the true nature and ends of prayer, our Lord adds an example of it; that divine form of prayer which seems in this place to be offered chiefly as a pattern, as the model and standard of all our prayers: “In this manner, therefore, pray.”
0.70	Whereas elsewhere he commands the use of these very words: “He said to them, When you pray, say...” (Luke 11:2.)
0.71	2. We may observe in general concerning this divine prayer, first, that it contains all we can reasonably or innocently pray for.
0.72	There is nothing which we need to ask of God, nothing which we can ask without offending him, which is not included, either directly or indirectly, in this comprehensive form.
0.73	Secondly, that it contains all we can reasonably or innocently desire; whatever is for the glory of God, whatever is needful or profitable, not only for ourselves, but for every creature in heaven and earth.
0.74	And indeed our prayers are the proper test of our desires, nothing being fit to have a place in our desires which is not fit to have a place in our prayers: what we may not pray for, we should not desire either.
0.75	Thirdly, that it contains all our duty to God and man; whatever things are pure and holy, whatever God requires of the children of men, whatever is acceptable in his sight, whatever it is by which we may benefit our neighbour, being expressed or implied in it.
0.76	3. It consists of three parts: the preface, the petitions, and the doxology, or conclusion.
0.77	The preface, “Our Father who is in heaven,” lays a general foundation for prayer, comprising what we must first know of God before we can pray in confidence of being heard.
0.78	It likewise points out to us all those tempers with which we are to approach God, which are most essentially required if we desire that either our prayers or our lives should find acceptance with him.
0.79	4. “Our Father”: if he is a Father, then he is good, then he is loving to his children.
0.80	And here is the first and great reason for prayer.
0.81	God is willing to bless; let us ask for a blessing. “Our Father”: our Creator; the Author of our being; he who raised us from the dust of the earth; who breathed into us the breath of life, and we became living souls.
0.82	But if he made us, let us ask, and he will not withhold any good thing from the work of his own hands. “Our Father”: our Preserver; who day by day sustains the life he has given; from whose continuing love we now and every moment receive life and breath and all things.
0.83	So much the more boldly let us come to him, and we shall “obtain mercy, and grace to help in time of need.”
0.84	Above all, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and of all who believe in him; who justifies us “freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in Jesus”; who has “blotted out all our sins, and healed all our infirmities”; who has received us as his own children, by adoption and grace; and “because” we “are sons, has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into” our “hearts, crying, Abba, Father”; who “has begotten us again of incorruptible seed,” and “created us anew in Christ Jesus.”
0.85	Therefore we know that he always hears us; therefore we pray to him without ceasing.
0.86	We pray because we love; and “we love him because he first loved us.”
0.87	5. “Our Father”: not mine only, who now cry to him, but ours in the widest sense.
0.88	The God and “Father of the spirits of all flesh”; the Father of angels and men: so even the heathen acknowledged him to be, Pater te theōn te.
0.89	The Father of the universe, of all the families both in heaven and on earth.
0.90	Therefore with him there is no partiality.
0.91	He loves all that he has made.
0.92	“He is loving to every man, and his mercy is over all his works.”
0.93	And the Lord’s delight is in those who fear him and put their trust in his mercy; in those who trust in him through the Son of his love, knowing they are “accepted in the Beloved.”
0.94	But “if God so loved us, we ought also to love one another”; yes, all mankind; seeing that “God so loved the world that he gave his only-begotten Son,” even to die the death, that they “might not perish, but have everlasting life.”
0.95	6. “Who is in heaven”: high and lifted up; God over all, blessed for ever; who, sitting on the circle of the heavens, beholds all things both in heaven and on earth; whose eye pervades the whole sphere of created being, yes, and of uncreated night; to whom “are known all his works,” and all the works of every creature, not only “from the beginning of the world” (a poor, low, weak translation), but ap’ aiōnos, from all eternity, from everlasting to everlasting; who compels the host of heaven, as well as the children of men, to cry out with wonder and amazement, O the depth! the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and of the knowledge of God!
0.96	Who is in heaven: the Lord and Ruler of all, overseeing and ordering all things; you who are the King of kings and Lord of lords, the blessed and only Potentate; you who are strong and girded about with power, doing whatever pleases you; the Almighty; for whenever you will, to do it is present with you.
0.97	In heaven: eminently there. Heaven is your throne, “the place where your honour” particularly “dwells.”
0.98	But not there alone; for you fill heaven and earth, the whole expanse of space. “Heaven and earth are full of your glory.
0.99	Glory be to you, O Lord most high!”
0.100	Therefore we should “serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice before him with reverence.”
0.101	Therefore we should think, speak, and act as continually under the eye, in the immediate presence, of the Lord, the King.
0.102	7. “Hallowed be your name.” This is the first of the six petitions of which the prayer itself is composed.
0.103	The name of God is God himself; the nature of God, so far as it can be revealed to man.
0.104	It means, therefore, together with his existence, all his attributes or perfections: his eternity, particularly signified by his great and incommunicable name, JEHOVAH, as the Apostle John translates it: to A kai to Ō, archē kai telos, ho ōn kai ho ēn kai ho erchomenos, “the Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end; he who is, and who was, and who is to come”; his fullness of being, denoted by his other great name, I AM THAT I AM!; his omnipresence; his omnipotence, who is indeed the only Agent in the material world, all matter being essentially dull and inactive, and moving only as it is moved by the finger of God; and he is the spring of action in every creature, visible and invisible, which could neither act nor exist without the continual inflow and agency of his almighty power; his wisdom, clearly deduced from the things that are seen, from the goodly order of the universe; his Trinity in Unity, and Unity in Trinity, revealed to us in the very first line of his written word, bara Elohim, literally, “the Gods created,” a plural noun joined with a verb of the singular number, as well as in every part of his later revelations, given by the mouth of all his holy Prophets and Apostles; his essential purity and holiness; and, above all, his love, which is the very brightness of his glory.
0.105	In praying that God, or his name, may “be hallowed” or glorified, we pray that he may be known, such as he is, by all who are capable of it, by all intelligent beings, and with affections suited to that knowledge; that he may be duly honoured, and feared, and loved by all in heaven above and on the earth beneath; by all angels and men, whom for that end he has made capable of knowing and loving him to eternity.
0.106	8. “Your kingdom come.” This has a close connection with the preceding petition.
0.107	In order that the name of God may be hallowed, we pray that his kingdom, the kingdom of Christ, may come.
0.108	This kingdom comes to a particular person when he “repents and believes the gospel”; when he is taught by God not only to know himself, but to know Jesus Christ and him crucified.
0.109	As “this is eternal life, to know the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom he has sent,” so it is the kingdom of God begun below, set up in the believer’s heart; “the Lord God Omnipotent” then “reigns,” when he is known through Christ Jesus.
0.110	He takes to himself his mighty power, that he may subdue all things to himself.
0.111	He goes on in the soul conquering and to conquer, until he has put all things under his feet, until “every thought is brought into captivity to the obedience of Christ.”
0.112	When, therefore, God shall “give his Son the heathen for his inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for his possession”; when “all kingdoms shall bow before him, and all nations shall do him service”; when “the mountain of the Lord’s house,” the Church of Christ, “shall be established on the top of the mountains”; when “the fullness of the Gentiles shall come in, and all Israel shall be saved”; then it shall be seen that “the Lord is King, and has put on glorious apparel,” appearing to every soul of man as King of kings and Lord of lords.
0.113	And it is fitting for all who love his appearing to pray that he would hasten the time; that this his kingdom, the kingdom of grace, may come quickly and swallow up all the kingdoms of the earth; that all mankind, receiving him as their King, truly believing in his name, may be filled with righteousness, and peace, and joy, with holiness and happiness, until they are removed from here into his heavenly kingdom, there to reign with him for ever and ever.
0.114	For this also we pray in those words, “Your kingdom come”: we pray for the coming of his everlasting kingdom, the kingdom of glory in heaven, which is the continuation and perfection of the kingdom of grace on earth.
0.115	Consequently this, as well as the preceding petition, is offered up for the whole intelligent creation, who are all concerned in this grand event, the final renewal of all things, by God’s putting an end to misery and sin, to infirmity and death, taking all things into his own hands, and setting up the kingdom which endures throughout all ages.
0.116	Exactly corresponding to this are those awe-inspiring words in the prayer at the burial of the dead: “Beseeching you that it may please you, of your gracious goodness, shortly to accomplish the number of your elect, and to hasten your kingdom: that we, with all those who have departed in the true faith of your holy name, may have our perfect consummation and bliss, both in body and soul, in your everlasting glory.”
0.117	9. “Your will be done on earth, as it is in heaven.” This is the necessary and immediate consequence wherever the kingdom of God has come; wherever God dwells in the soul by faith, and Christ reigns in the heart by love.
0.118	It is probable that many, perhaps most people, at the first view of these words, are apt to imagine they are only an expression of, or petition for, resignation; for a readiness to suffer the will of God, whatever it may be concerning us.
0.119	And this is unquestionably a divine and excellent temper, a most precious gift of God.
0.120	But this is not what we pray for in this petition; at least, not in its chief and primary sense.
0.121	We pray not so much for a passive as for an active conformity to the will of God, in saying, “Your will be done on earth, as it is in heaven.”
0.122	How is it done by the angels of God in heaven, those who now circle his throne rejoicing?
0.123	They do it willingly; they love his commandments, and gladly listen to his words.
0.124	It is their food and drink to do his will; it is their highest glory and joy.
0.125	They do it continually; there is no interruption in their willing service.
0.126	They do not rest day or night, but employ every hour (speaking after the manner of men; otherwise our measures of duration, days and nights and hours, have no place in eternity) in fulfilling his commands, in carrying out his designs, in performing the counsel of his will.
0.127	And they do it perfectly.
0.128	No sin, no defect belongs to angelic minds.
0.129	It is true that “the stars are not pure in his sight,” even the morning stars that sing together before him.
0.130	“In his sight,” that is, in comparison with him, the very angels are not pure.
0.131	But this does not imply that they are not pure in themselves.
0.132	Doubtless they are; they are without spot and blameless.
0.133	They are altogether devoted to his will, and perfectly obedient in all things.
0.134	If we view this in another light, we may observe that the angels of God in heaven do all the will of God.
0.135	And they do nothing else, nothing but what they are absolutely assured is his will.
0.136	Again, they do all the will of God as he wills it; in the manner which pleases him, and no other.
0.137	Yes, and they do this only because it is his will; for this end, and for no other reason.
0.138	10. When, therefore, we pray that the will of God may “be done on earth as it is in heaven,” the meaning is that all the inhabitants of the earth, even the whole race of mankind, may do the will of their Father who is in heaven as willingly as the holy angels; that these may do it continually, even as they do, without any interruption of their willing service; yes, and that they may do it perfectly; that “the God of peace, through the blood of the everlasting covenant, may make them perfect in every good work to do his will, and work in them all that is well-pleasing in his sight.”
0.139	In other words, we pray that we and all mankind may do the whole will of God in all things; and nothing else, not the least thing but what is the holy and acceptable will of God.
0.140	We pray that we may do the whole will of God as he wills, in the manner that pleases him; and, lastly, that we may do it because it is his will; that this may be the sole reason and ground, the whole and only motive, of whatever we think, or whatever we speak or do.
0.141	11. “Give us this day our daily bread.” In the three former petitions we have been praying for all mankind.
0.142	We now come more particularly to ask for a supply for our own wants.
0.143	Not that we are directed, even here, to confine our prayer altogether to ourselves; but this and each of the following petitions may be used for the whole Church of Christ on earth.
0.144	By “bread” we may understand all things needful, whether for our souls or bodies, ta pros zōēn kai eusebeian, the things pertaining to life and godliness: we understand not merely the outward bread, what our Lord calls the food which perishes, but much more the spiritual bread, the grace of God, the food which endures to everlasting life.
0.145	It was the judgement of many of the ancient Fathers that we are to understand the sacramental bread here also; received daily in the beginning by the whole Church of Christ, and highly esteemed, until the love of many grew cold, as the grand channel by which the grace of his Spirit was conveyed to the souls of all the children of God.
0.146	Our daily bread. The word we render daily has been explained differently by different commentators.
0.147	But the most plain and natural sense of it seems to be this, which is retained in almost all translations, ancient as well as modern: what is sufficient for this day; and so for each day as it follows.
0.148	12. “Give us”: for we claim nothing by right, but only of free mercy.
0.149	We do not deserve the air we breathe, the earth that bears us, or the sun that shines upon us.
0.150	All we deserve, we confess, is hell; but God loves us freely; therefore we ask him to give what we can no more obtain for ourselves than we can merit it at his hands.
0.151	Not that either the goodness or the power of God is a reason for us to stand idle.
0.152	It is his will that we should use all diligence in all things, that we should employ our utmost endeavours, as much as if our success were the natural effect of our own wisdom and strength; and then, as though we had done nothing, we are to depend on him, the giver of every good and perfect gift.
0.153	“This day”: for we are to take no thought for tomorrow.
0.154	For this very end our wise Creator has divided life into these little portions of time, so clearly separated from each other, that we might look on every day as a fresh gift of God, another life, which we may devote to his glory; and that every evening may be like the close of life, beyond which we are to see nothing but eternity.
0.155	13. “And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive those who trespass against us.” As nothing but sin can hinder the bounty of God from flowing out upon every creature, so this petition naturally follows the former; that, all hindrances being removed, we may the more clearly trust in the God of love for every kind of thing which is good.
0.156	“Our trespasses”: the word properly means our debts.
0.157	This is how our sins are frequently represented in Scripture; every sin placing us under a fresh debt to God, to whom we already owe, as it were, ten thousand talents.
0.158	What then can we answer when he says, “Pay me what you owe”?
0.159	We are utterly insolvent; we have nothing to pay; we have wasted all our substance.
0.160	Therefore, if he deals with us according to the rigour of his law, if he demands what he justly may, he must command us to be “bound hand and foot, and delivered over to the tormentors.”
0.161	Indeed we are already bound hand and foot by the chains of our own sins.
0.162	These, considered with regard to ourselves, are chains of iron and fetters of brass.
0.163	They are wounds with which the world, the flesh, and the devil have gashed and mangled us all over.
0.164	They are diseases that drink up our blood and spirits, that bring us down to the chambers of the grave.
0.165	But considered, as they are here, with regard to God, they are debts, immense and numberless.
0.166	Well, therefore, seeing we have nothing to pay, may we cry to him that he would “freely forgive” us all!
0.167	The word translated forgive implies either to forgive a debt or to loose a chain.
0.168	And if we attain the former, the latter follows as a matter of course: if our debts are forgiven, the chains fall off our hands.
0.169	As soon as, through the free grace of God in Christ, we “receive forgiveness of sins,” we likewise receive “a share among those who are sanctified by faith which is in him.”
0.170	Sin has lost its power; it has no dominion over those who “are under grace,” that is, in favour with God.
0.171	As “there is now no condemnation for those who are in Christ Jesus,” so they are freed from sin as well as from guilt.
0.172	“The righteousness of the law is fulfilled in” them, and they “walk not according to the flesh, but according to the Spirit.”
0.173	14. “As we forgive those who trespass against us.” In these words our Lord clearly declares both on what condition, and in what degree or manner, we may look to be forgiven by God.
0.174	All our trespasses and sins are forgiven us if we forgive others, and as we forgive them.
0.175	[First, God forgives us if we forgive others.]
0.176	This is a point of the utmost importance.
0.177	And our blessed Lord is so jealously concerned lest at any time we should let it slip out of our thoughts, that he not only inserts it in the body of his prayer, but immediately afterwards repeats it twice over.
0.178	“If,” he says, “you forgive people their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive you; but if you do not forgive people their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your trespasses.”
0.179	(Matthew 6:14–15.) Secondly, God forgives us as we forgive others.
0.180	So that if any malice or bitterness, if any taint of unkindness or anger remains, if we do not clearly, fully, and from the heart forgive all people their trespasses, we so far cut short the forgiveness of our own: God cannot clearly and fully forgive us; he may show us some degree of mercy; but we will not allow him to blot out all our sins and forgive all our iniquities.
0.181	In the meantime, while we do not from our hearts forgive our neighbour his trespasses, what kind of prayer are we offering to God whenever we utter these words?
0.182	We are indeed setting God at open defiance; we are daring him to do his worst.
0.183	“Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive those who trespass against us!”
0.184	That is, in plain terms, “Do not forgive us at all; we desire no favour at your hands.
0.185	We pray that you will keep our sins in remembrance, and that your wrath may remain upon us.”
0.186	But can you seriously offer such a prayer to God?
0.187	And has he not yet cast you alive into hell? O tempt him no longer!
0.188	Now, even now, by his grace, forgive as you would be forgiven!
0.189	Now have compassion on your fellow servant, as God has had and will have pity on you!
0.190	15. “And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil.” “[And] lead us not into temptation.”
0.191	The word translated temptation means trial of any kind.
0.192	And so the English word temptation was formerly taken in a neutral sense, although now it is usually understood of enticement to sin.
0.193	St. James uses the word in both these senses: first in its general, then in its restricted, meaning. He takes it in the former sense when he says, “Blessed is the man who endures temptation; for when he is tried,” or approved by God, “he shall receive the crown of life.”
0.194	(James 1:12–13.) He immediately adds, taking the word in the latter sense, “Let no man say, when he is tempted, I am tempted by God; for God cannot be tempted with evil, and he tempts no man.
0.195	But every man is tempted when he is drawn away by his own lust,” or desire, exelkomenos, drawn out of God, in whom alone he is safe, “and enticed”; caught like a fish with a bait.
0.196	It is then, when he is thus “drawn away and enticed,” that he properly “enters into temptation.”
0.197	Then temptation covers him like a cloud; it overspreads his whole soul.
0.198	Then how hard it will be for him to escape out of the snare!
0.199	Therefore we implore God “not to lead us into temptation,” that is (since God tempts no man), not to allow us to be led into it.
0.200	“But deliver us from evil”: rather, “from the evil one”; apo tou ponērou. Ho ponēros is unquestionably the wicked one, emphatically so called, the prince and god of this world, who works with mighty power in the children of disobedience.
0.201	But all those who are the children of God by faith are delivered out of his hands.
0.202	He may fight against them; and so he will.
0.203	But he cannot conquer, unless they betray their own souls.
0.204	He may torment for a time, but he cannot destroy; for God is on their side, who will not fail in the end to “avenge his own elect, who cry to him day and night.”
0.205	Lord, when we are tempted, do not allow us to enter into temptation!
0.206	Make a way for us to escape, that the wicked one may not touch us!
0.207	16. The conclusion of this divine prayer, commonly called the Doxology, is a solemn thanksgiving, a concise acknowledgement of the attributes and works of God.
0.208	“For yours is the kingdom”: the sovereign right over all things that are or ever were created; yes, your kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and your dominion endures throughout all ages.
0.209	“The power”: the executive power by which you govern all things in your everlasting kingdom, by which you do whatever pleases you, in all places of your dominion.
0.210	“And the glory”: the praise due from every creature, for your power, and the mightiness of your kingdom, and for all your wondrous works which you work from everlasting, and shall do, world without end, “for ever and ever!
0.211	Amen!” So be it!
0.212	I believe it will not be unwelcome to the serious reader if I add here
H:0.47	A PARAPHRASE OF THE LORD’S PRAYER
