0.1	“You adulterers and adulteresses, do you not know that the friendship of this world is enmity with God?
0.2	Whoever therefore desires to be a friend of the world is an enemy of God.” James 4:4.
0.3	1. There is a passage in St. Paul’s Epistle to the Romans which has often been supposed to have the same meaning as this: “Do not be conformed to this world” (Rom. 12:2). But it has little or no relation to it; it speaks of quite another thing.
0.4	Indeed, the supposed resemblance arises merely from the use of the word world in both places.
0.5	This naturally leads us to think that St. Paul means by conformity to the world the same thing that St. James means by friendship with the world; whereas they are entirely different things, as the words are quite different in the original: for St. Paul’s word is aion, St. James’s is kosmos.
0.6	However, the words of St. Paul contain an important direction to the children of God.
0.7	It is as if he had said, “Do not be conformed either to the wisdom, or the spirit, or the fashions of the age; either of the unconverted Jews or of the Heathens among whom you live.
0.8	You are called to show, by the whole tenor of your life and conduct, that you are ‘renewed in the spirit of your mind,’ after the image of him who created you; and that your rule is not the example or will of man, but ‘the good, and acceptable, and perfect will of God.’”
0.9	2. But it is not strange that St. James’s caution against friendship with the world should be so little understood, even among Christians.
0.10	For I have not been able to learn that any author, ancient or modern, has written on the subject: no, not (so far as I have ever observed) for sixteen or seventeen hundred years.
0.11	Even that excellent writer, Mr. Law, who has treated so many other subjects so well, has not, in all his practical treatises, written one chapter on it; no, nor said one word, that I remember, or given one caution against it.
0.12	I never heard one sermon preached on it, either before the University or elsewhere.
0.13	I was never in any company where the conversation turned explicitly to it, even for one hour.
0.14	3. Yet there are very few subjects of such deep importance; few that so closely concern the very essence of religion, the life of God in the soul: its continuance and increase, or its decay, yes, its extinction.
0.15	From the lack of instruction in this respect the most melancholy consequences have followed.
0.16	These indeed have not affected those who were still dead in trespasses and sins; but they have fallen heavily on many of those who were truly alive to God.
0.17	They have affected many of those called Methodists in particular; perhaps more than any other people.
0.18	For lack of understanding this advice of the Apostle (I hope rather than from any contempt of it), many among them are sick, spiritually sick, and many sleep who were once thoroughly awakened.
0.19	And it will be well if they ever wake again before their souls are required of them.
0.20	It has seemed difficult to me to account for what I have frequently observed: many who were once greatly alive to God, whose manner of life was in heaven, who had their affections on things above, not on things of the earth; though they walked in all the ordinances of God, though they still abounded in good works, and abstained from all known sin, yes, and from the appearance of evil; yet they gradually and imperceptibly decayed (like Jonah’s gourd, when the worm ate its root), so that they are less alive to God now than they were ten, twenty, or thirty years ago.
0.21	But it is easily accounted for, if we observe that as they increased in goods, they increased in friendship with the world; which indeed must always be the case, unless the mighty power of God intervenes.
0.22	But in the same proportion as they increased in this, the life of God in their soul decreased.
0.23	4. Is it strange that it should decrease, if those words are really found in the oracles of God: “You adulterers and adulteresses, do you not know that the friendship of the world is enmity with God?”
0.24	What is the meaning of these words?
0.25	Let us seriously consider.
0.26	And may God open the eyes of our understanding, that, in spite of all the mist with which the wisdom of the world would cover us, we may discern what is the good and acceptable will of God!
0.27	5. Let us, first, consider what the Apostle here means by the world.
0.28	He does not here refer to this outward frame of things, termed in Scripture heaven and earth, but to the inhabitants of the earth, the children of men, or at least the greater part of them.
0.29	But what part? This is fully determined both by our Lord himself and by his beloved disciple.
0.30	First, by our Lord himself.
0.31	His words are, “If the world hates you, you know that it hated me before it hated you.
0.32	If you were of the world, the world would love its own; but because you are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hates you.
0.33	If they have persecuted me, they will also persecute you.
0.34	And all these things they will do to you, because they do not know him who sent me.”
0.35	(John 15:18.) You see here that “the world” is placed on one side, and those who “are not of the world” on the other.
0.36	Those whom God has “chosen out of the world,” namely, by “sanctification of the Spirit and belief of the truth,” are set in direct opposition to those whom he has not so chosen.
0.37	Yet again: those “who do not know him who sent me,” says our Lord, who do not know God, they are “the world.”
0.38	6. Equally explicit are the words of the beloved disciple: “Do not marvel, my brethren, if the world hates you. We know that we have passed from death to life, because we love the brethren.”
0.39	(1 John 3:13, 14.)
0.40	As if he had said, “You must not expect anyone to love you except those who have ‘passed from death to life.’”
0.41	It follows that those who have not passed from death to life, who are not alive to God, are “the world.”
0.42	We may learn the same from those words in the fifth chapter, verse 19: “We know that we are of God, and the whole world lies in the wicked one.”
0.43	[1 John 5:19] Here “the world” plainly means those who are not of God, and who consequently “lie in the wicked one.”
0.44	7. Those, on the contrary, are of God who love God, or at least “fear him and keep his commandments.”
0.45	This is the lowest character of those who “are of God”; who are not properly sons, but servants; who depart from evil, and study to do good, and walk in all his ordinances, because they have the fear of God in their heart and a sincere desire to please him.
0.46	Fix in your heart this plain meaning of the term “the world”: those who do not fear God in this way.
0.47	Let no one deceive you with empty words: it means neither more nor less than this.
0.48	8. But understanding the term in this sense, what kind of friendship may we have with the world?
0.49	We may, and we ought to, love them as ourselves (for they also are included in the word neighbour); to bear them real goodwill; to desire their happiness as sincerely as we desire the happiness of our own souls; yes, we are in a sense to honour them (seeing we are directed by the Apostle to “honour all men”) as the creatures of God; indeed, as immortal spirits who are capable of knowing, of loving, and of enjoying him to all eternity.
0.50	We are to honour them as redeemed by the blood of him who “tasted death for every man.”
0.51	We are to bear them tender compassion when we see them forsaking their own mercies, wandering from the path of life, and hurrying to everlasting destruction.
0.52	We are never willingly to grieve their spirits or give them any pain; but, on the contrary, to give them all the pleasure we innocently can, seeing we are to “please all men for their good.”
0.53	We are never to exaggerate their faults, but willingly to acknowledge all the good that is in them.
0.54	9. We may, and ought to, speak to them on all occasions in the most kind and obliging manner we can.
0.55	We ought to speak no evil of them when they are absent, unless it is absolutely necessary, unless it is the only means we know of preventing them from doing harm; otherwise we are to speak of them with all the respect we can, without going beyond the bounds of truth.
0.56	We are to behave toward them, when present, with all courtesy, showing them all the regard we can without encouraging them in sin.
0.57	We ought to do them all the good that is in our power, all they are willing to receive from us; following in this the example of the universal Friend, our Father who is in heaven, who, until they will condescend to receive greater blessings, gives them such as they are willing to accept, “causing his sun to rise on the evil and the good, and sending” his “rain on the just and on the unjust.”
0.58	10. “But what kind of friendship is it that we may not have with the world?
0.59	May we not associate with ungodly men at all?
0.60	Ought we to avoid their company entirely?”
0.61	By no means. The contrary of this has already been granted.
0.62	If we were not to associate with them at all, “we would need to go out of the world.”
0.63	Then we could not show them those offices of kindness which have already been mentioned.
0.64	We may, doubtless, associate with them: first, on business, in the various purposes of this life, according to the station in it in which the providence of God has placed us; secondly, when courtesy requires it, only we must take great care not to carry it too far; thirdly, when we have a reasonable hope of doing them good.
0.65	But here too we have a special need of caution and of much prayer; otherwise we may easily burn ourselves in striving to pluck other brands out of the burning.
0.66	11. We may easily hurt our own souls by sliding into a close attachment to any of those who do not know God.
0.67	This is the friendship which is “enmity with God.” We cannot be too watchful over ourselves, lest we fall into this deadly snare; lest we develop, before we are aware of it, a love of complacency or delight in them.
0.68	Only then do we tread on sure ground when we can say with the Psalmist, “All my delight is in the saints who are on the earth, and in those who excel in virtue.”
0.69	We should have no needless conversations with them.
0.70	It is our duty and our wisdom to be with them no more often and no longer than is strictly necessary.
0.71	And during the whole time we need to remember and follow the example of him who said, “I kept my mouth as it were with a bridle while the ungodly was in my sight.”
0.72	We should enter into no kind of connection with them beyond what is absolutely necessary.
0.73	When Jehoshaphat forgot this and formed a connection with Ahab, what was the consequence?
0.74	He first lost his property: “The ships” they sent out “were broken at Ezion-geber.”
0.75	And when he was not content with this warning, as well as that of the prophet Micaiah, but would go up with him to Ramoth-Gilead, he was on the point of losing his life.
0.76	12. Above all, we should tremble at the very thought of entering into a marriage covenant, the closest of all, with any person who does not love, or at least fear, God.
0.77	This is the most horrid folly, the most deplorable madness, that a child of God can possibly plunge into, as it implies every kind of connection with the ungodly which a Christian is bound in conscience to avoid.
0.78	No wonder, then, that it is so flatly forbidden by God; that the prohibition is so absolute and peremptory: “Do not be unequally yoked with an unbeliever.”
0.79	Nothing can be more explicit.
0.80	Especially if we understand by the word unbeliever one who is so far from being a believer in the gospel sense — from being able to say, “The life which I now live I live by faith in the Son of God, who loved me and gave himself for me” — that he does not even have the faith of a servant: he does not “fear God and work righteousness.”
0.81	13. But for what reasons is the friendship of the world so absolutely prohibited?
0.82	Why are we so strictly required to abstain from it?
0.83	For two general reasons: first, because it is a sin in itself; secondly, because it is attended with the most dreadful consequences.
0.84	First, it is a sin in itself; and indeed, a sin of no common dye.
0.85	According to the oracles of God, friendship with the world is nothing less than spiritual adultery.
0.86	All who are guilty of it are addressed by the Holy Spirit in these terms: “You adulterers and adulteresses.”
0.87	It is plainly a violation of our marriage contract with God, by loving the creature more than the Creator, in flat contradiction to that kind command, “My son, give me your heart.”
0.88	14. It is a sin of the most heinous nature, as implying not only ignorance of God, and forgetfulness of him, or inattention to him, but positive “enmity against God.”
0.89	It is openly, palpably so.
0.90	“Do you not know,” says the Apostle — can you possibly be ignorant of this so plain, so undeniable a truth — “that the friendship of the world is enmity against God?”
0.91	Indeed, and how terrible is the inference which he draws from this!
0.92	“Therefore, whoever will be a friend of the world” — (the words, properly rendered, are, Whoever desires to be a friend of the world) of men who do not know God, whether he attains it or not — is, ipso facto, constituted an enemy of God.
0.93	This very desire, whether successful or not, gives him a right to that name.
0.94	15. And as it is a sin, a very heinous sin, in itself, so it is attended with the most dreadful consequences.
0.95	It frequently entangles men again in the commission of those sins from which “they had clean escaped.”
0.96	It generally makes them “partakers of other men’s sins,” even those which they do not commit themselves.
0.97	It gradually lessens their abhorrence and dread of sin in general, and thereby prepares them to fall an easy prey to any strong temptation.
0.98	It lays them open to all those sins of omission of which their worldly acquaintances are guilty.
0.99	It imperceptibly lessens their exactness in private prayer, in family duty, in fasting, in attending public worship, and in partaking of the Lord’s Supper.
0.100	The indifference of those who are near them with respect to all these will gradually influence them: even if they say not one word (which is hardly to be supposed) to recommend their own practice, yet their example speaks, and is many times of more force than any other language.
0.101	By this example they are unavoidably led astray, and almost continually, into unprofitable, yes, and uncharitable conversation; until they no longer “set a watch before their mouth, and keep the door of their lips”; until they can join in backbiting, tale-bearing, and evil-speaking without any check of conscience, having so frequently grieved the Holy Spirit of God that he no longer reproves them for it; so that their speech is not now, as formerly, “seasoned with salt, and fit to minister grace to the hearers.”
0.102	16. But these are not all the deadly consequences that result from familiar association with unholy men.
0.103	It not only hinders them from ordering their conduct rightly, but directly tends to corrupt the heart.
0.104	It tends to create or increase in us all that pride and self-sufficiency, all that fretfulness to resent, yes, every irregular passion and wrong disposition, which are indulged by their companions.
0.105	It gently leads them into habitual self-indulgence and unwillingness to deny themselves; into unreadiness to bear or take up any cross; into a softness and delicacy; into evil shame, and the fear of man, which brings countless snares.
0.106	It draws them back into the love of the world; into foolish and hurtful desires; into the desire of the flesh, the desire of the eyes, and the pride of life, until they are swallowed up in them.
0.107	So that, in the end, the last state of these men is far worse than the first.
0.108	17. If the children of God will connect themselves with the men of the world, though the latter should not endeavour to make them like themselves (which is a supposition by no means to be made), yes, though they should neither design nor desire it, yet they will actually do it, whether they design it and whether they endeavour it or not. I do not know how to account for it, but it is a real fact that their very spirit is infectious.
0.109	While you are near them, you are apt to catch their spirit, whether they will or not. Many physicians have observed that not only the plague, and putrid or malignant fevers, but almost every disease men are liable to, are more or less infectious.
0.110	And undoubtedly so are all spiritual diseases, only with great variety.
0.111	The infection is not so swiftly communicated by some as it is by others.
0.112	In either case, the person already diseased does not desire or design to infect another.
0.113	The man who has the plague does not desire or intend to communicate his disease to you.
0.114	But you are not therefore safe: so keep at a distance, or you will surely be infected.
0.115	Does not experience show that the case is the same with the diseases of the mind?
0.116	Suppose the proud, the vain, the passionate, the wanton, do not desire or design to infect you with their own diseases; yet it is best to keep at a distance from them.
0.117	You are not safe if you come too near them.
0.118	You will perceive (it is well if it is not too late) that their very breath is infectious.
0.119	It has lately been discovered that there is an atmosphere surrounding every human body, which naturally affects everyone who comes within its limits.
0.120	Is there not something analogous to this with regard to a human spirit?
0.121	If you remain long within their atmosphere, so to speak, you can hardly escape being infected.
0.122	The contagion spreads from soul to soul, as well as from body to body, even though the persons diseased do not intend or desire it.
0.123	But can this reasonably be supposed?
0.124	Is it not a notorious truth that men of the world (with exceedingly few exceptions) eagerly desire to make their companions like themselves? Yes, and use every means, with their utmost skill and industry, to accomplish their desire.
0.125	Therefore, flee for your life!
0.126	Do not play with the fire, but escape before the flames kindle upon you.
0.127	18. But how many are the pleas for friendship with the world!
0.128	And how strong are the temptations to it!
0.129	We will consider those of them which are the most dangerous and, at the same time, the most common.
0.130	To begin with one that is the most dangerous of all, and at the same time by no means uncommon.
0.131	“I grant,” says one, “the person I am about to marry is not a religious person.
0.132	She does not make any claim to it.
0.133	She has little thought about it.
0.134	But she is a beautiful creature.
0.135	She is extremely agreeable, and, I think, will make me a lovely companion.”
0.136	This is a snare indeed!
0.137	Perhaps one of the greatest that human nature is liable to.
0.138	This is such a temptation as no power of man is able to overcome.
0.139	Nothing less than the mighty power of God can make a way for you to escape from it.
0.140	And this can work a complete deliverance: his grace is sufficient for you.
0.141	But not unless you are a worker together with him: not unless you deny yourself and take up your cross.
0.142	And what you do, you must do at once!
0.143	Nothing can be done by degrees.
0.144	Whatever you do in this important case must be done at one stroke.
0.145	If it is to be done at all, you must at once cut off the right hand and cast it from you!
0.146	Here is no time for conferring with flesh and blood!
0.147	At once, conquer or perish!
0.148	19. Let us turn the tables.
0.149	Suppose a woman who loves God is courted by an agreeable man — genteel, lively, entertaining, suitable to her in all other respects, though not religious: what should she do in such a case?
0.150	What she should do, if she believes the Bible, is sufficiently clear.
0.151	But what can she do?
0.152	Is not this
0.153	A test for human frailty too severe?
0.154	Who is able to stand in such a trial?
0.155	Who can resist such a temptation?
0.156	None but one who holds fast the shield of faith and earnestly cries to the Strong for strength.
0.157	None but one who gives herself to watching and prayer, and continues in them with all perseverance.
0.158	If she does this, she will be a happy witness, in the midst of an unbelieving world, that as “all things are possible with God,” so all “things are possible to her who believes.”
0.159	20. But either a man or a woman may ask, “What if the person who seeks my acquaintance is a person of strong natural understanding, cultivated by varied learning?
0.160	May I not gain much useful knowledge by familiar association with him?
0.161	May I not learn many things from him, and greatly improve my own understanding?”
0.162	Undoubtedly you may improve your own understanding, and you may gain much knowledge.
0.163	But still, if he does not have at least the fear of God, your loss will be far greater than your gain.
0.164	For you can hardly avoid decreasing in holiness as much as you increase in knowledge.
0.165	And if you lose one degree of inward or outward holiness, all the knowledge you gain will be no equivalent.
0.166	21. “But his fine and strong understanding, improved by education, is not his chief recommendation.
0.167	He has more valuable qualities than these: he is remarkably good-humoured; he is of a compassionate, humane spirit; and he has much generosity in his temper.”
0.168	For these very reasons, if he does not fear God, he is infinitely more dangerous.
0.169	If you associate intimately with a person of this character, you will surely drink in his spirit.
0.170	It is hardly possible for you to avoid stopping just where he stops.
0.171	I have found nothing so difficult in all my life as to associate with men of this kind (good sort of men, as they are commonly called) without being hurt by them.
0.172	O beware of them!
0.173	Associate with them just as much as business requires, and no more; otherwise (though you do not feel any present harm), by slow and imperceptible degrees they will attach you again to earthly things and dampen the life of God in your soul.
0.174	22. It may be that the persons who desire your acquaintance, though they are not experienced in religion, yet understand it well, so that you frequently gain advantage from their conversation.
0.175	If this is really the case (as I have known a few instances of the kind), it seems you may associate with them, only very sparingly and very cautiously; otherwise you will lose more of your spiritual life than all the knowledge you gain is worth.
0.176	23. “But the persons in question are useful to me in carrying on my worldly business.
0.177	Indeed, on many occasions they are necessary to me, so that I could not well carry it on without them.”
0.178	Instances of this kind frequently occur.
0.179	And this is doubtless a sufficient reason for having some dealings, perhaps frequently, with men who do not fear God.
0.180	But even this is by no means a reason for your forming an intimate acquaintance with them.
0.181	And here you need to take the utmost care, “lest even by that association with them which is necessary, while your fortune in the world increases, the grace of God should decrease in your soul.”
0.182	24. There may be one more plausible reason given for some intimacy with an unholy man.
0.183	You may say, “I have been helpful to him.
0.184	I have assisted him when he was in trouble.
0.185	And he remembers it with gratitude.
0.186	He esteems and loves me, though he does not love God.
0.187	Ought I not then to love him?
0.188	Ought I not to return love for love?
0.189	Do not even the Heathens and tax collectors do so?”
0.190	I answer, you should certainly return love for love; but it does not follow that you should have any intimacy with him.
0.191	That would be at the peril of your soul.
0.192	Let your love find its outlet in constant and fervent prayer. Wrestle with God for him.
0.193	But do not let your love for him carry you so far as to weaken, if not destroy, your own soul.
0.194	25. “But must I not be intimate with my relatives, and that whether they fear God or not?
0.195	Has not his providence commended these to me?”
0.196	Undoubtedly it has; but there are relations nearer or more distant.
0.197	The nearest relations are husbands and wives.
0.198	As these have taken each other for better for worse, they must make the best of each other; seeing that, as God has joined them together, no one can put them asunder, except in case of adultery, or when the life of one or the other is in imminent danger.
0.199	Parents are almost as closely connected with their children.
0.200	You cannot part with them while they are young, it being your duty to “train them up,” with all care, “in the way they should go.”
0.201	How frequently you should associate with them when they are grown up is to be determined by Christian prudence.
0.202	This also will determine how long it is advisable for children, if it is their own choice, to remain with their parents.
0.203	In general, if they do not fear God, you should leave them as soon as is convenient.
0.204	But wherever you are, take care (if it is in your power) that they do not lack the necessities or conveniences of life.
0.205	As for all other relatives, even brothers or sisters, if they are of the world you are under no obligation to be intimate with them: you may be civil and friendly at a distance.
0.206	26. But granting that “the friendship of the world is enmity against God,” and consequently that it is the most excellent way, indeed the only way to heaven, to avoid all intimacy with worldly men; yet who has the resolution to walk in it? Who, even of those who love or fear God? For these alone are concerned in the present question.
0.207	A few I have known who, even in this respect, were lights in a darkened land; who did not and would not either form or continue any acquaintance with persons of the most refined and improved understanding and the most engaging tempers, merely because they were of the world, because they were not alive to God; yes, though they were capable of improving them in knowledge or of assisting them in business; indeed, though they admired and esteemed them for that very religion which they did not themselves experience: a case one would hardly think possible, but of which there are many instances at this day.
0.208	Familiar association even with these they steadily and resolutely refrain from, for conscience’ sake.
0.209	27. Go and do likewise, whoever you are who are a child of God by faith!
0.210	Whatever it costs, flee spiritual adultery.
0.211	Have no friendship with the world.
0.212	However tempted to it by profit or pleasure, form no intimacy with worldly-minded men.
0.213	And if you have already formed any such, break it off without delay.
0.214	Yes, if your ungodly friend is as dear to you as a right eye, or as useful as a right hand, yet do not confer with flesh and blood, but pluck out the right eye, cut off the right hand, and cast them from you!
0.215	It is not an indifferent thing.
0.216	Your life is at stake: eternal life or eternal death.
0.217	And is it not better to enter into life having one eye or one hand, than having both to be cast into hell fire?
0.218	When you knew no better, God overlooked the times of ignorance.
0.219	But now your eyes are opened, now the light has come; walk in the light!
0.220	Do not touch pitch, lest you be defiled.
0.221	At all events, “keep yourself pure!”
0.222	28. But whatever others do, whether they will hear or whether they will refuse, hear this, all you who are called Methodists!
0.223	However pressed or tempted to it, have no friendship with the world.
0.224	Look around, and see the melancholy effects it has produced among your brethren!
0.225	How many of the mighty have fallen!
0.226	How many have fallen by this very thing!
0.227	They would take no warning: they would associate, and that intimately, with earthly-minded men, until they “measured back their steps to earth again!”
0.228	O “come out from among them!” — from all unholy men, however harmless they may appear — “and be separate”: at least so far as to have no intimacy with them.
0.229	As your “fellowship is with the Father and with his Son Jesus Christ,” so let it be with those, and those only, who at least seek the Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity.
0.230	So “you shall be,” in a special sense, “my sons and my daughters, says the Lord Almighty.”
