0.1	“Circumcision is that of the heart, in the spirit, and not in the letter.” Romans 2:29.
0.2	1. It is the sad remark of an excellent man that whoever now preaches the most essential duties of Christianity runs the risk of being regarded, by a great part of his hearers, as “a proclaimer of new doctrines.”
0.3	Most people have so lived away the substance of that religion whose profession they still retain, that no sooner are any of those truths put forward which distinguish the Spirit of Christ from the spirit of the world than they cry out, “You are bringing strange things to our ears; we want to know what these things mean”—though he is only preaching to them “Jesus and the resurrection,” with its necessary consequence: If Christ is risen, you ought then to die to the world, and to live wholly to God.
0.4	2. This is a hard saying to the natural man, who is alive to the world and dead to God; and one that he will not readily be persuaded to receive as the truth of God, unless it is so qualified in the interpretation as to have neither use nor meaning left.
0.5	He “does not receive the” words “of the Spirit of God,” taken in their plain and obvious meaning; “they are foolishness to him; nor” indeed “can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned.” They can be perceived only by that spiritual sense which in him has never yet been awakened; and for lack of it he must reject, as idle fancies of men, what are both the wisdom and the power of God.
0.6	3. That “circumcision is that of the heart, in the spirit, and not in the letter”—that the distinguishing mark of a true follower of Christ, of one who is in a state of acceptance with God, is not outward circumcision, or baptism, or any other outward form, but a right state of soul, a mind and spirit renewed after the image of him who created it—is one of those important truths that can only be spiritually discerned.
0.7	And the Apostle himself hints at this in the next words: “Whose praise is not from men, but from God.”
0.8	As if he had said, “Do not expect, whoever you are who thus follow your great Master, that the world, those who do not follow him, will say, ‘Well done, good and faithful servant!’
0.9	Know that the circumcision of the heart, the seal of your calling, is foolishness to the world.
0.10	Be content to wait for your applause until the day of your Lord’s appearing.
0.11	On that day you shall have praise from God, in the great assembly of men and angels.”
0.12	I intend, first, to inquire in particular what this circumcision of the heart consists of; and, second, to mention some reflections that naturally arise from such an inquiry.
0.13	I. 1. I am, first, to inquire what that circumcision of the heart consists of which will receive the praise of God.
0.14	In general we may observe that it is that habitual disposition of soul which in the sacred writings is called holiness; and which directly implies being cleansed from sin, “from all filthiness both of flesh and spirit”; and, as a consequence, being endowed with those virtues which were also in Christ Jesus; being so “renewed in the spirit of our mind” as to be “perfect as our Father in heaven is perfect.”
0.15	2. To be more specific: circumcision of heart implies humility, faith, hope, and charity.
0.16	Humility, a right judgment of ourselves, cleanses our minds from those high notions of our own perfection, from that undue opinion of our own abilities and attainments, which are the genuine fruit of a corrupted nature.
0.17	This entirely cuts off that vain thought, “I am rich, and wise, and have need of nothing”; and convinces us that we are by nature wretched, and poor, and miserable, and blind, and naked.
0.18	It convinces us that in our best state we are, of ourselves, all sin and vanity; that confusion, and ignorance, and error reign over our understanding; that unreasonable, earthly, sensual, devilish passions usurp authority over our will; in a word, that there is no sound part in our soul, that all the foundations of our nature are out of order.
0.19	3. At the same time we are convinced that we are not sufficient of ourselves to help ourselves; that without the Spirit of God we can do nothing but add sin to sin; that it is he alone who works in us by his almighty power, either to will or to do that which is good; it being as impossible for us even to think a good thought, without the supernatural assistance of his Spirit, as to create ourselves, or to renew our whole souls in righteousness and true holiness.
0.20	4. A sure effect of our having formed this right judgment of the sinfulness and helplessness of our nature is a disregard of that “honor which comes from man,” which is usually paid to some supposed excellence in us.
0.21	He who knows himself neither desires nor values the applause which he knows he does not deserve.
0.22	It is therefore “a very small thing to him to be judged by man’s judgment.”
0.23	He has every reason to think, by comparing what the world has said, either for or against him, with what he feels in his own breast, that the world, as well as the god of this world, was “a liar from the beginning.”
0.24	And even as to those who are not of the world: though he would choose, if it were the will of God, that they should regard him as one who desires to be found a faithful steward of his Lord’s goods, if perhaps this might be a means of enabling him to be of more use to his fellow servants, yet as this is the one purpose of his wishing for their approval, so he does not rest on it at all; for he is assured that whatever God wills, he can never lack instruments to carry it out, since he is able, even from these stones, to raise up servants to do his pleasure.
0.25	5. This is that lowliness of mind which those who follow his example and tread in his steps have learned from Christ.
0.26	And this knowledge of their disease, by which they are more and more cleansed from one part of it, pride and vanity, disposes them to embrace with a willing mind the second thing implied in circumcision of the heart—that faith which alone is able to make them whole, which is the one medicine given under heaven to heal their sickness.
0.27	6. The best guide of the blind, the surest light of those who are in darkness, the most perfect instructor of the foolish, is faith.
0.28	But it must be such a faith as is “mighty through God to the pulling down of strongholds”—to the overturning of all the prejudices of corrupt reason, all the false maxims revered among men, all evil customs and habits, all that “wisdom of the world which is foolishness with God”; such a faith as “casts down imaginations,” reasonings, “and every high thing that exalts itself against the knowledge of God, and brings into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ.”
0.29	7. “All things are possible to him who” thus “believes.”
0.30	“The eyes of his understanding being enlightened,” he sees what his calling is: namely, to glorify God, who has bought him at so high a price, in his body and in his spirit, which are now God’s by redemption as well as by creation.
0.31	He feels what is “the exceeding greatness of this power” of him who, as he raised up Christ from the dead, so is able to “make us alive, who are dead in sin, by his Spirit who dwells in us.”
0.32	“This is the victory that overcomes the world, even our faith”; that faith which is not only an unshaken assent to all that God has revealed in Scripture—and in particular to those important truths, “Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners”; “He bore our sins in his own body on the tree”; “He is the propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world”—but likewise the revelation of Christ in our hearts; a divine evidence or conviction of his love, his free, unmerited love to me a sinner; a sure confidence in his pardoning mercy, worked in us by the Holy Spirit; a confidence by which every true believer is enabled to bear witness, “I know that my Redeemer lives,” that I have an “Advocate with the Father,” and that “Jesus Christ the righteous” is my Lord, and “the propitiation for my sins”—I know he has “loved me, and given himself for me”—he has reconciled me, even me, to God; and I “have redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of sins.”
0.33	8. Such a faith as this cannot fail to show clearly the power of him who inspires it, by delivering his children from the yoke of sin, and “purging their consciences from dead works”; by strengthening them so that they are no longer compelled to obey sin in its desires; but instead of yielding their members to it “as instruments of unrighteousness,” they now “yield themselves” entirely “to God, as those who are alive from the dead.”
0.34	9. Those who are thus born of God by faith also have strong consolation through hope.
0.35	This is the next thing which the circumcision of the heart implies: namely, the testimony of their own spirit with the Spirit who witnesses in their hearts that they are the children of God.
0.36	Indeed, it is the same Spirit who works in them that clear and cheerful confidence that their heart is upright toward God; that good assurance that they now do, through his grace, the things which are acceptable in his sight; that they are now in the path which leads to life, and shall, by the mercy of God, endure in it to the end.
0.37	It is he who gives them a lively expectation of receiving all good things at God’s hand; a joyful prospect of that crown of glory which is reserved in heaven for them.
0.38	By this anchor a Christian is kept steady in the midst of the waves of this troubled world, and preserved from striking upon either of those fatal rocks—presumption or despair.
0.39	He is neither discouraged by a misconceived severity of his Lord, nor does he despise the riches of his goodness.
0.40	He neither imagines the difficulties of the race set before him to be greater than he has strength to conquer, nor expects them to be so small as to give way in the conflict before he has put forth all his strength.
0.41	The experience he already has in the Christian warfare, as it assures him that his “labor is not in vain” if “whatever his hand finds to do, he does it with his might,” so it forbids him to entertain so vain a thought as that he can gain any advantage in any other way, that any virtue can be shown, any praise attained, by faint hearts and feeble hands; or indeed by any but those who pursue the same course as the great Apostle of the Gentiles: “I,” he says, “so run, not with uncertainty; so I fight, not as one who beats the air. But I keep my body under control and bring it into subjection, lest by any means, when I have preached to others, I myself should be cast away.”
0.42	10. By the same discipline every good soldier of Christ is to train himself to endure hardship.
0.43	Confirmed and strengthened by this, he will be able to renounce not only the works of darkness, but every appetite too, and every affection, which is not subject to the law of God.
0.44	For “everyone,” says St. John, “who has this hope purifies himself, just as he is pure.”
0.45	It is his daily care, by the grace of God in Christ and through the blood of the covenant, to purge the inmost recesses of his soul from the lusts that previously possessed and defiled it; from uncleanness, and envy, and malice, and wrath; from every passion and temper that is after the flesh, that either springs from or nourishes his native corruption; knowing well that he whose very body is the temple of God ought to admit into it nothing common or unclean, and that holiness befits that house forever where the Spirit of holiness is pleased to dwell.
0.46	11. Yet you lack one thing, whoever you are, who to a deep humility and a steadfast faith have joined a lively hope, and thereby in good measure cleansed your heart from its inborn pollution.
0.47	If you would be perfect, add to all these charity; add love, and you have the circumcision of the heart. “Love is the fulfilling of the law, the end of the commandment.”
0.48	Very excellent things are spoken of love; it is the essence, the spirit, the life of all virtue.
0.49	It is not only the first and great commandment, but it is all the commandments in one.
0.50	“Whatever things are just, whatever things are pure, whatever things are lovely,” or honorable, “if there is any virtue, if there is any praise,” they are all included in this one word—love.
0.51	In this is perfection, and glory, and happiness.
0.52	The royal law of heaven and earth is this: “You shall love the Lord your God with all your heart, and with all your soul, and with all your mind, and with all your strength.”
0.53	12. Not that this forbids us to love anything besides God: it implies that we love our brother also.
0.54	Nor does it forbid us (as some have strangely imagined) to take pleasure in anything but God.
0.55	To suppose this is to suppose that the Fountain of holiness is directly the author of sin, since he has inseparably joined pleasure to the use of those creatures which are necessary to sustain the life he has given us.
0.56	This, therefore, can never be the meaning of his command.
0.57	What its real sense is, both our blessed Lord and his apostles tell us too frequently and too plainly to be misunderstood.
0.58	They all with one voice bear witness that the true meaning of those several declarations—“The Lord your God is one Lord”; “You shall have no other gods but me”; “You shall love the Lord your God with all your strength”; “You shall cling to him”; “The desire of your soul shall be to his name”—is no other than this: The one perfect Good shall be your one ultimate end.
0.59	One thing you shall desire for its own sake—the enjoyment of him who is All in All.
0.60	One happiness you shall set before your souls: union with him who made them; having “fellowship with the Father and the Son”; being joined to the Lord in one Spirit.
0.61	One purpose you are to pursue to the end of time—the enjoyment of God in time and in eternity.
0.62	Desire other things so far as they tend to this.
0.63	Love the creature as it leads to the Creator.
0.64	But in every step you take, let this be the glorious point that ends your view.
0.65	Let every affection, and thought, and word, and work be subordinate to this.
0.66	Whatever you desire or fear, whatever you seek or shun, whatever you think, speak, or do, let it be in order to your happiness in God, the sole End as well as Source of your being.
0.67	13. Have no end, no ultimate end, but God.
0.68	Thus our Lord: “One thing is needful”; and if your eye is singly fixed on this one thing, “your whole body shall be full of light.”
0.69	Thus St. Paul: “This one thing I do; I press toward the mark for the prize of the high calling in Christ Jesus.”
0.70	Thus St. James: “Cleanse your hands, you sinners, and purify your hearts, you double-minded.”
0.71	Thus St. John: “Do not love the world, nor the things that are in the world.
0.72	For all that is in the world, the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eye, and the pride of life, is not of the Father, but is of the world.”
0.73	Seeking happiness in what gratifies either the desire of the flesh, by pleasantly striking the outward senses; or the desire of the eye, of the imagination, by its novelty, greatness, or beauty; or the pride of life, whether by pomp, grandeur, power, or their usual consequence, applause and admiration—this “is not of the Father”; it neither comes from, nor is approved by, the Father of spirits; it is “of the world”: it is the distinguishing mark of those who will not have him to reign over them.
0.74	II. 1. Thus I have inquired in particular what that circumcision of heart is which will obtain the praise of God.
0.75	I am, in the second place, to mention some reflections that naturally arise from such an inquiry, as a plain rule by which every man may judge of himself whether he is of the world or of God.
0.76	And, first, it is clear from what has been said that no man has a claim to the praise of God unless his heart is circumcised by humility; unless he is little, and base, and vile in his own eyes; unless he is deeply convinced of that inborn “corruption of his nature,” “by which he is very far gone from original righteousness,” being prone to all evil, averse to all good, corrupt and abominable; having a “carnal mind which is enmity against God, and is not subject to the law of God, nor indeed can be”; unless he continually feels in his inmost soul that without the Spirit of God resting upon him he can neither think, nor desire, nor speak, nor do anything good or well-pleasing in his sight.
0.77	No man, I say, has a claim to the praise of God until he feels his need of God; nor indeed until he seeks that “honor which comes from God alone,” and neither desires nor pursues that which comes from man, except only so far as it tends to this.
0.78	2. Another truth, which naturally follows from what has been said, is that no one shall obtain the honor that comes from God unless his heart is circumcised by faith, even a “faith of the operation of God”: unless, refusing to be led any longer by his senses, appetites, or passions, or even by that blind leader of the blind so idolized by the world, natural reason, he lives and walks by faith; directs every step as one “seeking him who is invisible”; “looks not at the things which are seen, which are temporal, but at the things which are not seen, which are eternal”; and governs all his desires, plans, and thoughts, all his actions and conduct, as one who has entered within the veil, where Jesus sits at the right hand of God.
0.79	3. It is to be wished that those were better acquainted with this faith who spend much of their time and effort laying another foundation: grounding religion on the eternal fitness of things, on the intrinsic excellence of virtue and the beauty of actions flowing from it; on the reasons, as they call them, of good and evil, and the relations of beings to each other.
0.80	Either these accounts of the grounds of Christian duty agree with the scriptural account, or they do not.
0.81	If they do, why are well-meaning people perplexed, and drawn away from the weightier matters of the law, by a cloud of terms, by which the easiest truths are explained into obscurity?
0.82	If they do not, then it is fitting for them to consider who is the author of this new doctrine; whether he is likely to be an angel from heaven who preaches another gospel than that of Christ Jesus; though, if he were, God, not we, has pronounced his sentence: “Let him be accursed.”
0.83	4. Our gospel, as it knows no other foundation of good works than faith, or of faith than Christ, so it clearly informs us that we are not his disciples while we deny either him to be the Author, or his Spirit to be the Inspirer and Perfecter, of both our faith and our works.
0.84	“If anyone does not have the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his.”
0.85	He alone can give life to those who are dead to God, can breathe into them the breath of Christian life, and so go before, accompany, and follow them with his grace as to bring their good desires to good effect.
0.86	And “as many as are thus led by the Spirit of God, they are the sons of God.”
0.87	This is God’s short and plain account of true religion and virtue; and “other foundation can no one lay.”
0.88	5. From what has been said we may, third, learn that no one is truly “led by the Spirit” unless that “Spirit bears witness with his spirit that he is a child of God”; unless he sees the prize and the crown before him, and “rejoices in hope of the glory of God.”
0.89	So greatly have they erred who have taught that in serving God we ought not to have a view to our own happiness!
0.90	No, but we are often and expressly taught by God to have “respect to the recompense of the reward”; to balance toil with the “joy set before us,” these “light afflictions” with that “exceeding weight of glory.”
0.91	Yes, we are “aliens to the covenant of promise,” we are “without God in the world,” until God, “of his abundant mercy, has begotten us again to a living hope of the inheritance incorruptible and undefiled, and that does not fade away.”
0.92	6. But if these things are so, it is high time for those persons to deal faithfully with their own souls who are so far from finding in themselves this joyful assurance that they fulfill the terms, and shall obtain the promises, of that covenant, that they quarrel with the covenant itself and blaspheme its terms; complaining that they are too severe, and that no man ever did or shall live up to them.
0.93	What is this but to reproach God, as if he were a hard Master, requiring of his servants more than he enables them to perform?—as if he had mocked the helpless works of his hands by binding them to impossibilities; by commanding them to overcome where neither their own strength nor grace was sufficient for them?
0.94	7. These blasphemers might almost persuade those to imagine themselves guiltless who, at the opposite extreme, hope to fulfill the commands of God without taking any pains at all.
0.95	Vain hope! that a child of Adam should ever expect to see the kingdom of Christ and of God without striving, without agonizing, first “to enter in at the narrow gate”; that one who was “conceived and born in sin,” and whose “inward parts are very wickedness,” should once entertain a thought of being “purified as his Lord is pure,” unless he treads in his steps and “takes up his cross daily”; unless he “cuts off his right hand,” and “plucks out the right eye, and casts it from him”; that he should ever dream of shaking off his old opinions, passions, and tempers, of being “sanctified throughout in spirit, soul, and body,” without a constant and continued course of general self-denial!
0.96	8. What less than this can we possibly infer from the above-cited words of St. Paul, who, living “in infirmities, in reproaches, in necessities, in persecutions, in distresses” for Christ’s sake; who, being full of “signs, and wonders, and mighty deeds”; who, having been “caught up into the third heaven,” yet reckoned, as a recent author strongly expresses it, that all his virtues would be insecure, and even his salvation in danger, without this constant self-denial?
0.97	“So I run,” he says, “not with uncertainty; so I fight, not as one who beats the air”; by which he plainly teaches us that he who does not thus run, who does not thus deny himself daily, does run uncertainly, and fights to as little purpose as he who “beats the air.”
0.98	9. To as little purpose does he talk of “fighting the fight of faith,” and as vainly does he hope to attain the crown of incorruption (as we may, lastly, infer from the preceding observations), whose heart is not circumcised by love.
0.99	Love, cutting off both the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eye, and the pride of life—engaging the whole man, body, soul, and spirit, in the ardent pursuit of that one object—is so essential to a child of God that, without it, whoever lives is counted dead before him.
0.100	“Though I speak with the tongues of men and of angels, and do not have love, I am like sounding brass or a tinkling cymbal.
0.101	Though I have the gift of prophecy, and understand all mysteries and all knowledge; and though I have all faith, so that I could remove mountains, and do not have love, I am nothing.”
0.102	Indeed, “though I give all my goods to feed the poor, and my body to be burned, and do not have love, it profits me nothing.”
0.103	10. Here, then, is the sum of the perfect law; this is the true circumcision of the heart.
0.104	Let the spirit return to God who gave it, with the whole train of its affections.
0.105	“To the place from which all the rivers came, there let them flow again.
0.106	Other sacrifices from us he would not have; but the living sacrifice of the heart he has chosen.
0.107	Let it be continually offered up to God through Christ, in flames of holy love.
0.108	And let no creature be allowed to share with him; for he is a jealous God.
0.109	His throne he will not divide with another; he will reign without a rival.
0.110	Let no design, no desire be admitted there but what has him for its ultimate object.
0.111	This is the way in which those children of God once walked who, being dead, still speak to us.” “Desire not to live but to praise his name; let all your thoughts, words, and works tend to his glory.
0.112	Set your heart firmly on him, and on other things only as they are in and from him.
0.113	Let your soul be filled with so entire a love of him that you may love nothing but for his sake.”
0.114	“Have a pure intention of heart, a steadfast regard to his glory in all your actions.”
0.115	“Fix your eye upon the blessed hope of your calling, and make all the things of the world serve it.”
0.116	For then, and not until then, is that “mind in us which was also in Christ Jesus,” when, in every motion of our heart, in every word of our tongue, in every work of our hands, we “pursue nothing but in relation to him, and in subordination to his pleasure”; when we, too, neither think, nor speak, nor act to fulfill our “own will, but the will of him who sent us”; when, whether we “eat, or drink, or whatever we do, we do all to the glory of God.”
