0.1	“And when he departed from there, he came upon Jehonadab the son of Rechab coming to meet him; and he greeted him and said to him, Is your heart right, as my heart is with your heart?
0.2	And Jehonadab answered: It is.
0.3	If it is, give me your hand.”
0.4	2 Kings 10:15.
0.5	1. It is granted even by those who do not pay this great debt, that love is due to all mankind; the royal law, “You shall love your neighbour as yourself,” carries its own evidence to all who hear it: and that, not according to the miserable interpretation put upon it by the zealots of old times, “You shall love your neighbour,” your relative, acquaintance, friend, “and hate your enemy”; not so; “I say to you,” said our Lord, “Love your enemies, bless those who curse you, do good to those who hate you, and pray for those who spitefully use you and persecute you; that you may be the children,” may appear so to all mankind, “of your Father who is in heaven; who makes his sun rise on the evil and on the good, and sends rain on the just and on the unjust.”
0.6	2. But it is certain that there is a particular love which we owe to those who love God.
0.7	So David says: “All my delight is in the saints who are on the earth, and in those who excel in virtue.”
0.8	And so says one greater than he: “A new commandment I give to you, that you love one another; as I have loved you, that you also love one another.
0.9	By this all men shall know that you are My disciples, if you have love for one another” (John 13:34, 35).
0.10	This is that love on which the Apostle John so frequently and so strongly insists: “This,” he says, “is the message that you heard from the beginning, that we should love one another” (1 John 3:11).
0.11	“By this we perceive the love of God, because he laid down his life for us: and we ought,” if love should call us to it, “to lay down our lives for the brethren” (verse 16).
0.12	And again: “Beloved, let us love one another, for love is of God.
0.13	He who does not love does not know God, for God is love” (4:7, 8).
0.14	“Not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be the propitiation for our sins.
0.15	Beloved, if God so loved us, we also ought to love one another” (verses 10, 11).
0.16	3. All men approve of this; but do all men practise it?
0.17	Daily experience shows the contrary.
0.18	Where are even the Christians who “love one another as he has given us commandment”? How many hindrances lie in the way!
0.19	The two great, general hindrances are, first, that they cannot all think alike; and, in consequence of this, secondly, that they cannot all walk alike; but in several smaller points their practice must differ in proportion to the difference of their views.
0.20	4. But although a difference in opinions or modes of worship may prevent a complete outward union, need it prevent our union in affection?
0.21	Though we cannot think alike, may we not love alike?
0.22	May we not be of one heart, though we are not of one opinion?
0.23	Without any doubt, we may.
0.24	In this all the children of God may unite, notwithstanding these smaller differences.
0.25	While these remain as they are, they may help one another forward in love and in good works.
0.26	5. Surely in this respect the example of Jehu himself, mixed a character as he was, is well worthy of both the attention and the imitation of every serious Christian.
0.27	“And when he departed from there, he came upon Jehonadab the son of Rechab coming to meet him; and he greeted him and said to him, Is your heart right, as my heart is with your heart?
0.28	And Jehonadab answered, It is.
0.29	If it is, give me your hand.”
0.30	The text naturally divides itself into two parts: first, a question put by Jehu to Jehonadab: “Is your heart right, as my heart is with your heart?”
0.31	Secondly, an offer made upon Jehonadab’s answering, “It is”: “If it is, give me your hand.”
0.32	I. 1. And first, let us consider the question put by Jehu to Jehonadab, “Is your heart right, as my heart is with your heart?”
0.33	The very first thing we may observe in these words is that here there is no inquiry concerning Jehonadab’s opinions.
0.34	And yet it is certain that he held some which were very uncommon, indeed quite peculiar to himself; and some which had a close bearing on his practice; on which, likewise, he laid so great a stress as to bind them upon his children’s children, to their latest descendants.
0.35	This is evident from the account given by Jeremiah many years after his death: “I took Jaazaniah and his brothers and all his sons, and the whole house of the Rechabites, . . . and set before them pots full of wine, and cups, and said to them, Drink wine.
0.36	But they said, We will drink no wine: for Jonadab,” or Jehonadab, “the son of Rechab, our father” (it would be less ambiguous if the words were arranged thus: “Jehonadab our father, the son of Rechab,” out of love and reverence for whom he probably desired that his descendants might be called by his name), “commanded us, saying, You shall drink no wine, neither you nor your sons, for ever.
0.37	Neither shall you build a house, nor sow seed, nor plant a vineyard, nor have any: but all your days you shall dwell in tents....
0.38	And we have obeyed, and done according to all that Jonadab our father commanded us” (Jeremiah 35:3–10).
0.39	2. And yet Jehu (although it seems to have been his habit, in things both secular and religious, to drive furiously) does not concern himself at all with any of these things, but leaves Jehonadab free to follow his own judgement.
0.40	And neither of them appears to have given the other the least disturbance regarding the opinions which he held.
0.41	3. It is very possible that many good men now also may hold peculiar opinions; and some of them may be as singular in this as even Jehonadab was.
0.42	And it is certain that, so long as we know only in part, all men will not see all things alike.
0.43	It is an unavoidable consequence of the present weakness and limitation of human understanding that different men will be of different minds in religion as well as in ordinary life.
0.44	So it has been from the beginning of the world, and so it will be “until the restoration of all things.”
0.45	4. Indeed, further: although every man necessarily believes that every particular opinion which he holds is true (for to believe that any opinion is not true is the same thing as not to hold it), yet no man can be assured that all his own opinions, taken together, are true.
0.46	Indeed, every thinking man is assured that they are not, since humanum est errare et nescire: “To be ignorant of many things, and to be mistaken in some, is the necessary condition of humanity.”
0.47	This, therefore, he is aware, is his own case.
0.48	He knows, in general, that he himself is mistaken; although in what particulars he is mistaken, he does not, perhaps he cannot, know.
0.49	5. I say “perhaps he cannot know”; for who can tell how far invincible ignorance may extend? Or (which comes to the same thing) invincible prejudice?—which is often so fixed in young minds that it is afterwards impossible to tear up what has taken so deep a root.
0.50	And who can say, unless he knew every circumstance attending it, how far any mistake is culpable? For all guilt must presuppose some consent of the will; of which only he can judge who searches the heart.
0.51	6. Every wise man, therefore, will allow others the same liberty of thinking which he desires they should allow him; and will no more insist on their embracing his opinions than he would have them insist on his embracing theirs.
0.52	He bears with those who differ from him, and asks the one with whom he desires to unite in love only that single question, “Is your heart right, as my heart is with your heart?”
0.53	7. We may, secondly, observe that here no inquiry is made concerning Jehonadab’s mode of worship; although it is highly probable that there was, in this respect also, a very wide difference between them.
0.54	For we may well believe that Jehonadab, as well as all his descendants, worshipped God at Jerusalem, whereas Jehu did not: he had more regard for political policy than for religion.
0.55	And therefore, although he slew the worshippers of Baal and “destroyed Baal from Israel,” yet from the convenient sin of Jeroboam, the worship of the “golden calves,” he “did not depart” (2 Kings 10:29).
0.56	8. But even among men of an upright heart, men who desire to “have a conscience clear of offence,” it must be that, as long as there are various opinions, there will be various ways of worshipping God; since a variety of opinion necessarily implies a variety of practice.
0.57	And as, in all ages, men have differed in nothing more than in their opinions concerning the Supreme Being, so in nothing have they differed more from each other than in the manner of worshipping him.
0.58	Had this been only in the heathen world, it would not have been at all surprising: for we know that these “through” their “wisdom did not know God”; nor, therefore, could they know how to worship him.
0.59	But is it not strange that even in the Christian world, although they all agree in the general principle, “God is a Spirit, and those who worship him must worship him in spirit and in truth,” yet the particular modes of worshipping God are almost as various as among the heathen?
0.60	9. And how shall we choose among so much variety?
0.61	No man can choose for, or prescribe to, another.
0.62	But everyone must follow the dictates of his own conscience, in simplicity and godly sincerity.
0.63	He must be fully persuaded in his own mind, and then act according to the best light he has.
0.64	Nor has any creature power to compel another to walk by his own rule.
0.65	God has given no right to any of the children of men thus to lord it over the conscience of his brethren; but every man must judge for himself, as every man must give an account of himself to God.
0.66	10. Therefore, although every follower of Christ is obliged, by the very nature of the Christian institution, to be a member of some particular congregation or other, some Church, as it is usually called (which implies a particular manner of worshipping God; for “two cannot walk together unless they are agreed”), yet none can be obliged by any power on earth but that of his own conscience to prefer this or that congregation to another, this or that particular manner of worship.
0.67	I know it is commonly supposed that the place of our birth fixes the Church to which we ought to belong; that one, for instance, who is born in England ought to be a member of what is called the Church of England, and consequently to worship God in the particular manner which is prescribed by that Church.
0.68	I was once a zealous defender of this; but I find many reasons to moderate this zeal.
0.69	I fear it is attended with such difficulties as no reasonable man can get over.
0.70	Not the least of these is that, if this rule had been followed, there could have been no Reformation from Popery; since it entirely destroys the right of private judgement, on which that whole Reformation stands.
0.71	11. I dare not, therefore, presume to impose my mode of worship on anyone else.
0.72	I believe it is truly primitive and apostolic; but my belief is no rule for another.
0.73	I do not ask, therefore, of him with whom I would unite in love, Are you of my church, of my congregation?
0.74	Do you accept the same form of church government, and recognize the same church officers, as I do?
0.75	Do you join in the same form of prayer in which I worship God?
0.76	I do not inquire, Do you receive the Lord’s Supper in the same posture and manner that I do? nor whether, in the administration of baptism, you agree with me in admitting sponsors for the baptized, in the manner of administering it, or in the age of those to whom it should be administered.
0.77	Indeed, I do not ask of you (as clear as I am in my own mind) whether you allow baptism and the Lord’s Supper at all.
0.78	Let all these things stand aside: we will talk of them, if need be, at a more convenient time; my only question at present is this, “Is your heart right, as my heart is with your heart?”
0.79	12. But what is properly implied in the question?
0.80	I do not mean, What did Jehu imply by it?
0.81	But, What should a follower of Christ understand by it, when he puts it to any of his brethren?
0.82	The first thing implied is this: Is your heart right with God?
0.83	Do you believe in his being and his perfections? His eternity, immensity, wisdom, power? His justice, mercy, and truth?
0.84	Do you believe that he now “upholds all things by the word of his power”? And that he governs even the most minute, even the most harmful, to his own glory and the good of those who love him? Do you have a divine evidence, a supernatural conviction, of the things of God?
0.85	Do you “walk by faith, not by sight,” looking not at temporal things, but at things eternal?
0.86	13. Do you believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, “God over all, blessed for ever”?
0.87	Is he revealed in your soul?
0.88	Do you know Jesus Christ and him crucified?
0.89	Does he dwell in you, and you in him?
0.90	Is he formed in your heart by faith? Having absolutely renounced all your own works, your own righteousness, have you “submitted yourself to the righteousness of God, which is by faith in Christ Jesus”?
0.91	Are you “found in him, not having your own righteousness, but the righteousness which is by faith”?
0.92	And are you, through him, “fighting the good fight of faith, and laying hold of eternal life”?
0.93	14. Is your faith energoumene di agapes—filled with the energy of love?
0.94	Do you love God (I do not say “above all things,” for that is both an unscriptural and an ambiguous expression, but) “with all your heart, and with all your mind, and with all your soul, and with all your strength”?
0.95	Do you seek all your happiness in him alone?
0.96	And do you find what you seek?
0.97	Does your soul continually “magnify the Lord, and your spirit rejoice in God your Saviour”? Having learned “in everything to give thanks,” do you find “it is a joyful and a pleasant thing to be thankful”?
0.98	Is God the centre of your soul, the sum of all your desires?
0.99	Are you accordingly laying up your treasure in heaven, and counting all things else dung and dross? Has the love of God cast the love of the world out of your soul?
0.100	Then you are “crucified to the world”; you are dead to all below; and your “life is hidden with Christ in God.”
0.101	15. Are you occupied in doing “not your own will, but the will of him who sent you”—of him who sent you down to stay here for a while, to spend a few days in a strange land, until, having finished the work he has given you to do, you return to your Father’s house?
0.102	Is it your food and drink “to do the will of your Father who is in heaven”?
0.103	Is your eye single in all things? Always fixed on him? Always looking to Jesus?
0.104	Do you aim at him in whatever you do? In all your labour, your business, your conduct? Aiming only at the glory of God in all, “whatever you do, either in word or deed, doing it all in the name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God, even the Father, through him”?
0.105	16. Does the love of God constrain you to serve him with fear, to “rejoice before him with reverence”?
0.106	Are you more afraid of displeasing God than of either death or hell?
0.107	Is nothing so terrible to you as the thought of offending the eyes of his glory?
0.108	On this ground, do you “hate every evil way,” every transgression of his holy and perfect law; and in this “exercise yourself to have a conscience clear of offence toward God and toward man”?
0.109	17. Is your heart right toward your neighbour?
0.110	Do you love all mankind as yourself, without exception?
0.111	“If you love only those who love you, what thanks do you deserve?”
0.112	Do you “love your enemies”?
0.113	Is your soul full of goodwill, of tender affection, toward them?
0.114	Do you love even the enemies of God, the unthankful and unholy?
0.115	Does your heart yearn over them?
0.116	Could you “wish yourself” temporally “accursed” for their sake?
0.117	And do you show this by “blessing those who curse you, and praying for those who spitefully use you and persecute you”?
0.118	18. Do you show your love by your works?
0.119	While you have time, as you have opportunity, do you in fact “do good to all men,” neighbours or strangers, friends or enemies, good or bad?
0.120	Do you do them all the good you can, endeavouring to supply all their needs, assisting them both in body and soul to the utmost of your power?—If you are so minded, every Christian may say, yes, if you are only sincerely desirous of it, and pressing on until you attain it, then “your heart is right, as my heart is with your heart.”
0.121	II. 1. “If it is, give me your hand.”
0.122	I do not mean, “Be of my opinion.”
0.123	You need not be: I do not expect or desire it.
0.124	Neither do I mean, “I will be of your opinion.”
0.125	I cannot; it does not depend on my choice: I can no more think as I will than I can see or hear as I will.
0.126	You keep your opinion, and I mine; and that as steadily as ever.
0.127	You need not even try to come over to me, or to bring me over to you.
0.128	I do not desire you to dispute those points, or to hear or speak one word concerning them.
0.129	Let all opinions alone on one side and the other: only “give me your hand.”
0.130	2. I do not mean, “Embrace my modes of worship,” or, “I will embrace yours.”
0.131	This also is a thing which does not depend either on your choice or on mine.
0.132	We must both act as each is fully persuaded in his own mind.
0.133	Hold fast to what you believe is most acceptable to God, and I will do the same.
0.134	I believe the Episcopal form of church government to be scriptural and apostolic.
0.135	If you think the Presbyterian or Independent form is better, think so still, and act accordingly.
0.136	I believe infants ought to be baptized, and that this may be done either by dipping or by sprinkling.
0.137	If you are otherwise persuaded, remain so, and follow your own persuasion.
0.138	It appears to me that forms of prayer are of excellent use, particularly in the great congregation.
0.139	If you judge extempore prayer to be of more use, act in keeping with your own judgement.
0.140	My view is that I ought not to forbid water in which people may be baptized, and that I ought to eat bread and drink wine as a memorial of my dying Master; however, if you are not convinced of this, act according to the light you have.
0.141	I have no desire to dispute with you for one moment on any of the preceding points.
0.142	Let all these smaller points stand aside.
0.143	Let them never come into view. “If your heart is as my heart,” if you love God and all mankind, I ask no more: “give me your hand.”
0.144	3. I mean, first, love me: and that not only as you love all mankind; not only as you love your enemies, or the enemies of God, those who hate you, who “spitefully use you and persecute you”; not only as a stranger, as one of whom you know neither good nor evil—I am not satisfied with this—no; “if your heart is right, as mine is with your heart,” then love me with a very tender affection, as a friend who is closer than a brother; as a brother in Christ, a fellow citizen of the New Jerusalem, a fellow soldier engaged in the same warfare, under the same Captain of our salvation.
0.145	Love me as a companion in the kingdom and patience of Jesus, and a joint heir of his glory.
0.146	4. Love me (but in a higher degree than you love the bulk of mankind) with the love that is long-suffering and kind; that is patient—if I am ignorant or have gone astray, bearing and not increasing my burden; and is tender, gentle, and compassionate still; that does not envy, if at any time it pleases God to prosper me in his work even more than you.
0.147	Love me with the love that is not provoked, either at my follies or my weaknesses; or even at my acting (if it should sometimes appear so to you) not according to the will of God.
0.148	Love me so as to think no evil of me; to put away all jealousy and evil suspicion.
0.149	Love me with the love that covers all things; that never reveals either my faults or my weaknesses—that believes all things; is always willing to think the best, to put the fairest interpretation on all my words and actions—that hopes all things; either that the thing reported was never done; or not done with such circumstances as are reported; or, at least, that it was done with a good intention, or in a sudden stress of temptation.
0.150	And hope to the end that whatever is amiss will, by the grace of God, be corrected; and whatever is lacking, supplied, through the riches of his mercy in Christ Jesus.
0.151	5. I mean, secondly, commend me to God in all your prayers; wrestle with him on my behalf, that he would speedily correct what he sees amiss, and supply what is lacking in me.
0.152	In your nearest approach to the throne of grace, beg of him who is then very present with you that my heart may be more like your heart, more right both toward God and toward man; that I may have a fuller conviction of things not seen, and a stronger view of the love of God in Christ Jesus; may more steadily walk by faith, not by sight; and more earnestly lay hold of eternal life.
0.153	Pray that the love of God and of all mankind may be more abundantly poured into my heart; that I may be more fervent and active in doing the will of my Father who is in heaven, more zealous for good works, and more careful to abstain from every appearance of evil.
0.154	6. I mean, thirdly, stir me up to love and to good works.
0.155	Support your prayer, as you have opportunity, by speaking to me, in love, whatever you believe to be for my soul’s health.
0.156	Urge me on in the work which God has given me to do, and instruct me how to do it more perfectly.
0.157	Yes, “strike me as a friend, and rebuke me,” wherever I appear to you to be doing my own will rather than the will of him who sent me.
0.158	O speak and do not hold back whatever you believe may contribute either to the amending of my faults, the strengthening of my weakness, the building of me up in love, or the making of me more fit, in any way, for the Master’s use.
0.159	7. I mean, lastly, love me not in word only, but in deed and in truth.
0.160	So far as you can in conscience (still retaining your own opinions and your own manner of worshipping God), join with me in the work of God; and let us go on hand in hand.
0.161	And this far, it is certain, you may go.
0.162	Speak honourably, wherever you are, of the work of God, by whomever he works, and kindly of his messengers.
0.163	And, if it is in your power, not only sympathize with them when they are in any difficulty or distress, but give them cheerful and effective help, that they may glorify God on your behalf.
0.164	8. Two things should be observed with regard to what has been spoken under this last head: the one, that whatever love, whatever acts of love, whatever spiritual or temporal help I claim from him whose heart is right, as my heart is with his, the same I am ready, by the grace of God, according to my measure, to give him; the other, that I have not made this claim on behalf of myself only, but of all whose heart is right toward God and man, that we may all love one another as Christ has loved us.
0.165	III. 1. One inference we may draw from what has been said.
0.166	We may learn from this what a catholic spirit is.
0.167	There is hardly any expression which has been more grossly misunderstood, and more dangerously misapplied, than this: but it will be easy for anyone who calmly considers the preceding observations to correct any such misunderstanding of it, and to prevent any such misapplication.
0.168	For from this we may learn, first, that a catholic spirit is not speculative latitudinarianism.
0.169	It is not an indifference to all opinions: this is the spawn of hell, not the offspring of heaven.
0.170	This unsettledness of thought, this being “driven to and fro, and tossed about with every wind of doctrine,” is a great curse, not a blessing; an irreconcilable enemy, not a friend, to true catholicism.
0.171	A man of a truly catholic spirit does not still have his religion to seek.
0.172	He is fixed as the sun in his judgement concerning the main branches of Christian doctrine.
0.173	It is true, he is always ready to hear and weigh whatever can be offered against his principles; but as this does not show any wavering in his own mind, neither does it cause any.
0.174	He does not waver between two opinions, nor vainly try to blend them into one.
0.175	Take note of this, you who do not know what spirit you are of: who call yourselves men of a catholic spirit only because you are of a muddy understanding; because your mind is all in a mist; because you have no settled, consistent principles, but are for jumbling all opinions together.
0.176	Be convinced that you have entirely missed your way; you do not know where you are.
0.177	You think you have entered into the very spirit of Christ, when in truth you are nearer the spirit of Antichrist.
0.178	Go first and learn the first elements of the gospel of Christ, and then you shall learn to be of a truly catholic spirit.
0.179	2. From what has been said we may learn, secondly, that a catholic spirit is not any kind of practical latitudinarianism.
0.180	It is not indifference as to public worship, or as to the outward manner of performing it.
0.181	This, likewise, would not be a blessing but a curse.
0.182	Far from being a help to it, it would, so long as it remained, be an unspeakable hindrance to the worshipping of God in spirit and in truth.
0.183	But the man of a truly catholic spirit, having weighed all things in the balance of the sanctuary, has no doubt, no scruple at all, concerning the particular mode of worship in which he joins.
0.184	He is clearly convinced that this manner of worshipping God is both scriptural and rational.
0.185	He knows none in the world which is more scriptural, none which is more rational.
0.186	Therefore, without wandering here and there, he holds close to it, and praises God for the opportunity of doing so.
0.187	3. From this we may, thirdly, learn that a catholic spirit is not indifference to all congregations.
0.188	This is another sort of latitudinarianism, no less absurd and unscriptural than the former.
0.189	But it is far from a man of a truly catholic spirit.
0.190	He is fixed in his congregation as well as in his principles.
0.191	He is united to one, not only in spirit, but by all the outward ties of Christian fellowship.
0.192	There he partakes of all the ordinances of God.
0.193	There he receives the Lord’s Supper.
0.194	There he pours out his soul in public prayer, and joins in public praise and thanksgiving.
0.195	There he rejoices to hear the word of reconciliation, the gospel of the grace of God.
0.196	With these, his nearest, his best-beloved brethren, on solemn occasions, he seeks God by fasting.
0.197	These in particular he watches over in love, as they do over his soul; admonishing, exhorting, comforting, reproving, and in every way building each other up in the faith.
0.198	These he regards as his own household; and therefore, according to the ability God has given him, he naturally cares for them, and provides that they may have all the things that are needful for life and godliness.
0.199	4. But while he is steadily fixed in his religious principles, in what he believes to be the truth as it is in Jesus; while he firmly adheres to that worship of God which he judges to be most acceptable in his sight; and while he is united by the tenderest and closest ties to one particular congregation—his heart is enlarged toward all mankind, those he knows and those he does not; he embraces with strong and cordial affection neighbours and strangers, friends and enemies.
0.200	This is catholic or universal love.
0.201	And he who has this is of a catholic spirit.
0.202	For love alone gives the title to this character: catholic love is a catholic spirit.
0.203	5. If, then, we take this word in the strictest sense, a man of a catholic spirit is one who, in the manner mentioned above, gives his hand to all whose hearts are right with his heart: one who knows how to value, and praise God for, all the advantages he enjoys with regard to the knowledge of the things of God, the true scriptural manner of worshipping him, and, above all, his union with a congregation fearing God and working righteousness: one who, retaining these blessings with the strictest care, keeping them as the apple of his eye, at the same time loves—as friends, as brethren in the Lord, as members of Christ and children of God, as joint partakers now of the present kingdom of God, and fellow heirs of his eternal kingdom—all, of whatever opinion or worship or congregation, who believe in the Lord Jesus Christ; who love God and man; who, rejoicing to please God and fearing to offend him, are careful to abstain from evil, and zealous for good works.
0.204	He is the man of a truly catholic spirit who bears all these continually upon his heart; who, having an unspeakable tenderness for their persons and longing for their welfare, does not cease to commend them to God in prayer, as well as to plead their cause before men; who speaks comfortably to them, and labours, by all his words, to strengthen their hands in God.
0.205	He assists them to the utmost of his power in all things, spiritual and temporal.
0.206	He is ready “to spend and be spent for them”; yes, to lay down his life for their sake.
0.207	6. You, O man of God, think on these things!
0.208	If you are already in this way, go on.
0.209	If you have previously mistaken the path, bless God who has brought you back!
0.210	And now run the race which is set before you, in the royal way of universal love.
0.211	Take care that you are neither wavering in your judgement nor narrowed in your affections: but keep an even pace, rooted in the faith once delivered to the saints, and grounded in love, in true catholic love, until you are swallowed up in love for ever and ever!
0.212	Weary of all this wordy strife, / These notions, forms, and modes, and names, / To You, the Way, the Truth, the Life, / Whose love my simple heart inflames, / Divinely taught, at last I fly, / With You and Yours to live and die.
0.213	Forth from the midst of Babel brought, / Parties and sects I cast behind; / Enlarged my heart, and free my thought, / Wherever the latent truth I find, / The latent truth with joy to own, / And bow to Jesus’ name alone.
0.214	Redeemed by Your almighty grace, / I taste my glorious liberty, / With open arms the world embrace, / But cling to those who cling to You; / But only in Your saints delight, / Who walk with God in purest white.
0.215	One with the little flock I rest, / The members sound who hold the Head, / The chosen few, with pardon blessed, / And by the anointing Spirit led / Into the mind that was in You, / Into the depths of Deity.
0.216	My brethren, friends, and kinsmen these, / Who do my heavenly Father’s will; / Who aim at perfect holiness, / And all Your counsels to fulfil, / Thirsting to be whatever You are, / And love their God with all their heart.
0.217	For these, however in flesh disjoined, / Wherever dispersed over earth abroad, / Unfeigned, unbounded love I find, / And constant as the life of God; / Fountain of life, from there it sprang, / As pure, as even, and as strong.
0.218	Joined to the hidden church unknown / In this sure bond of perfectness, / Obscurely safe, I dwell alone / And glory in the uniting grace, / To me, to each believer given, / To all Your saints on earth and heaven.
