0.1	“Let me die the death of the righteous, and let my last end be like his!” Numbers 23:10.
0.2	1. “Let my last end be like his!”
0.3	How many of you join in this wish?
0.4	Perhaps there are few of you who do not, even in this great congregation!
0.5	And oh, that this wish may rest upon your minds! — that it may not die away until your souls also are lodged “where the wicked cease from troubling, and where the weary are at rest!”
0.6	2. A detailed exposition of the text will not be expected on this occasion.
0.7	It would keep you too long from the sad yet pleasing thought of your beloved brother, friend, and pastor; yes, and father too: for how many are here whom he has “begotten in the Lord!”
0.8	Will it not, then, be more suited to your inclinations, as well as to this solemn occasion, to speak directly of this man of God, whom you have so often heard speaking in this place? — the end of whose conduct you know, “Jesus Christ, the same yesterday, and today, and forever.”
0.9	And may we not,
0.10	I. Observe a few particulars of his life and death?
0.11	II. Take some view of his character? and,
0.12	III. Inquire how we may make good use of this solemn providence, his sudden removal from us?
0.13	1. We may, in the first place, observe a few particulars of his life and death.
0.14	He was born at Gloucester in December 1714, and was put to a grammar school there when he was about twelve years old.
0.15	When he was seventeen, he began to be seriously religious, and served God to the best of his knowledge.
0.16	At about eighteen he went up to the University and was admitted to Pembroke College in Oxford; and about a year later he became acquainted with the Methodists (so called), whom from that time on he loved as his own soul.
0.17	2. Through them he was convinced that we “must be born again,” or outward religion will profit us nothing.
0.18	He joined with them in fasting on Wednesdays and Fridays; in visiting the sick and the prisoners; and in gathering up the very fragments of time, so that no moment might be lost: and he changed the course of his studies, reading chiefly such books as entered into the heart of religion and led directly to an experiential knowledge of Jesus Christ, and Him crucified.
0.19	3. He was soon tried as if by fire.
0.20	Not only was his reputation lost, and some of his dearest friends forsook him; but he was also tested by inward trials, and those of the severest kind.
0.21	Many nights he lay sleepless upon his bed; many days, prostrate on the ground.
0.22	But after he had groaned for several months under “the spirit of bondage,” God was pleased to remove the heavy load by giving him “the Spirit of adoption,” enabling him, through a living faith, to lay hold of “the Son of His love.”
0.23	4. However, it was thought necessary, for the recovery of his health, which was much impaired, that he should go into the country.
0.24	He accordingly went to Gloucester, where God enabled him to awaken several young people.
0.25	These soon formed themselves into a little society, and were some of the firstfruits of his labor.
0.26	Shortly afterward he began to read, two or three times a week, to some poor people in the town; and every day to read to and pray with the prisoners in the county jail.
0.27	5. Being now about twenty-one years of age, he was urged to enter into holy orders.
0.28	He was greatly afraid of this, being deeply aware of his own insufficiency.
0.29	But when the Bishop himself sent for him and told him, “Though I had intended to ordain no one under twenty-three, yet I will ordain you whenever you come” — and several other providential circumstances came together — he submitted, and was ordained on Trinity Sunday, 1736.
0.30	The next Sunday he preached to a crowded congregation in the church in which he had been baptized.
0.31	The following week he returned to Oxford and took his Bachelor’s degree: and he was now fully occupied, the care of the prisoners and the poor resting chiefly on him.
0.32	6. But it was not long before he was invited to London, to serve the parish of a friend who was going into the country.
0.33	He stayed there two months, lodging in the Tower, reading prayers in the chapel twice a week, catechizing and preaching once, besides visiting the soldiers in the barracks and the infirmary.
0.34	He also read prayers every evening at the Wapping chapel, and preached at Ludgate prison every Tuesday.
0.35	While he was here, letters came from his friends in Georgia which made him long to go and help them: but not seeing his call clearly, at the appointed time he returned to his little charge at Oxford, where several young men met daily in his room to build each other up in their most holy faith.
0.36	7. But he was soon called away from there again, to supply the parish of Dummer, in Hampshire.
0.37	Here he read prayers twice a day: early in the morning, and in the evening after the people came home from work.
0.38	He also catechized the children daily, and visited from house to house.
0.39	He now divided the day into three parts, allotting eight hours for sleep and meals, eight for study and solitude, and eight for reading prayers, catechizing, and visiting the people.
0.40	Is there a more excellent way for a servant of Christ and His Church?
0.41	If not, who will “go and do likewise”?
0.42	8. Yet his mind still ran on going abroad; and being now fully convinced that he was called by God to it, he set all things in order and, in January 1737, went down to take leave of his friends in Gloucester.
0.43	It was on this journey that God began to bless his ministry in an uncommon way.
0.44	Wherever he preached — in Gloucester, in Stonehouse, in Bath, in Bristol — amazing multitudes of hearers flocked together, so that the heat in the churches was scarcely bearable: and the impressions made on the minds of many were no less extraordinary.
0.45	After his return to London, while he was detained by General Oglethorpe from week to week and from month to month, it pleased God to bless his word still more.
0.46	And he was tireless in his labor: generally on Sunday he preached four times, to exceedingly large congregations, besides reading prayers two or three times, and often walking back and forth ten or twelve miles.
0.47	9. On December 28 he left London.
0.48	It was on the 29th that he first preached without notes.
0.49	On December 30 he went on board; but it was over a month before they were clear of the land.
0.50	One happy effect of their very slow passage he mentions the following April: “Blessed be God, we now live very comfortably in the great cabin.
0.51	We talk of little else but God and Christ; and scarcely a word is heard among us when we are together but what has reference to our fall in the first, and our new birth in the Second, Adam.”
0.52	It seems, likewise, to have been a special providence that he should spend a little time at Gibraltar, where both citizens and soldiers, high and low, young and old, acknowledged the day of their visitation.
0.53	10. From Sunday, May 7, 1738, until the latter end of the following August, he “made full proof of his ministry” in Georgia, particularly at Savannah: he read prayers and expounded twice a day, and visited the sick daily.
0.54	On Sunday he expounded at five in the morning; at ten he read prayers and preached, and again at three in the afternoon; and at seven in the evening he expounded the Church Catechism.
0.55	How much easier it is for our brethren in the ministry, whether in England, Scotland, or Ireland, to find fault with such a laborer in our Lord’s vineyard than to walk in his steps!
0.56	11. It was now that he observed the deplorable condition of many children here, and that God put into his heart the first thought of founding an Orphan House, for which he resolved to raise contributions in England, if God should give him a safe return there.
0.57	The following December he did return to London; and on Sunday, January 14, 1739, he was ordained priest at Christ Church, Oxford.
0.58	The next day he came to London again; and on Sunday the 21st he preached twice.
0.59	But though the churches were large and exceedingly crowded, yet many hundreds stood in the churchyard, and hundreds more went back home.
0.60	This first set him thinking of preaching in the open air.
0.61	But when he mentioned it to some of his friends, they judged it to be sheer madness: so he did not carry it out until after he had left London.
0.62	It was on Wednesday, February 21, that, finding all the church doors shut in Bristol (besides the fact that no church was able to hold half the congregation), at three in the afternoon he went to Kingswood and preached in the open air to nearly two thousand people.
0.63	On Friday he preached there to four or five thousand; and on Sunday to, it was supposed, ten thousand!
0.64	The number continually increased all the time he stayed at Bristol; and a flame of holy love was kindled which will not easily be put out.
0.65	The same was afterward kindled in various parts of Wales, of Gloucestershire, and of Worcestershire.
0.66	Indeed, wherever he went, God abundantly confirmed the word of His messenger.
0.67	12. On Sunday, April 29, he preached for the first time in Moorfields and on Kennington Common; and the thousands of hearers were as quiet as they could have been in a church.
0.68	Being again detained in England from month to month, he made little excursions into several counties, and received the contributions of willing multitudes for an Orphan House in Georgia.
0.69	The embargo that was now laid on shipping gave him leisure for more journeys through various parts of England, for which many will have reason to bless God to all eternity.
0.70	At length, on August 14, he embarked: but he did not land in Pennsylvania until October 30.
0.71	Afterward he went through Pennsylvania, the Jerseys, New York, Maryland, Virginia, and North and South Carolina, preaching all along the way to immense congregations, with fully as great an effect as in England.
0.72	On January 10, 1740, he arrived at Savannah.
0.73	13. On January 29 he added three desolate orphans to the nearly twenty whom he had in his house before.
0.74	The next day he laid out the ground for the house, about ten miles from Savannah.
0.75	On February 11 he took in four more orphans, and set out for Frederica in order to fetch the orphans who were in the southern parts of the colony.
0.76	On his return he established a school, both for children and for grown people, at Darien, and took four orphans from there.
0.77	On March 25 he laid the first stone of the Orphan House, to which, with great fitness, he gave the name Bethesda; a work for which children yet unborn shall praise the Lord.
0.78	He now had about forty orphans, so that there were nearly a hundred mouths to be fed daily.
0.79	But he was “anxious about nothing,” casting his care on Him who feeds the young ravens that call upon Him.
0.80	14. In April he made another tour through Pennsylvania, the Jerseys, and New York.
0.81	Incredible multitudes flocked to hear, among whom were a great many Black people.
0.82	In all places the greater part of the hearers were moved to an amazing degree.
0.83	Many were deeply convinced of their lost state; many were truly converted to God.
0.84	In some places thousands cried out aloud; many as if in the agonies of death; most were drowned in tears; some turned pale as death; others were wringing their hands; others lying on the ground; others sinking into the arms of their friends; almost all lifting up their eyes and calling for mercy.
0.85	15. He returned to Savannah on June 5.
0.86	The next evening, during the public service, the whole congregation, young and old, dissolved in tears: after the service several of the parishioners, and all his family, especially the little children, went home crying along the street, and some could not help praying aloud.
0.87	The groans and cries of the children continued all night, and for a great part of the next day.
0.88	16. In August he set out again, and came through various provinces to Boston.
0.89	While he was here and in the neighboring places, he was extremely weak in body: yet the multitudes of hearers were so great, and the effects produced in them so astonishing, that the oldest men then alive in the town had never seen the like before.
0.90	The same power attended his preaching at New York, particularly on Sunday, November 2: almost as soon as he began, crying, weeping, and wailing were to be heard on every side.
0.91	Many sank down to the ground, cut to the heart; and many were filled with divine consolation.
0.92	Toward the close of his journey he made this reflection: “It is the seventy-fifth day since I arrived at Rhode Island, exceedingly weak in body; yet God has enabled me to preach a hundred and seventy-five times in public, besides exhorting frequently in private!
0.93	Never did God grant me greater comforts: never did I make my journeys with less fatigue, or see such a continuance of the divine presence in the congregations to whom I preached.”
0.94	In December he returned to Savannah, and the following March he arrived in England.
0.95	17. You may easily observe that the preceding account is chiefly drawn from his own journals, which, for their artless and unaffected simplicity, may rival any writings of their kind.
0.96	And how exact a sample this is of his labors, both in Europe and America, for the honor of his beloved Master, during the thirty years that followed, as well as of the uninterrupted shower of blessings with which God was pleased to prosper his labors!
0.97	Is it not much to be lamented that anything should have prevented him from continuing this account, at least until near the time when he was called by his Lord to enjoy the fruit of his labor?
0.98	If he has left any papers of this kind, and his friends count me worthy of the honor, it would be my glory and joy to arrange, transcribe, and prepare them for publication.
0.99	18. A detailed account of the last scene of his life is given as follows by a gentleman of Boston: —
0.100	“After being about a month with us in Boston and its vicinity, and preaching every day, he went to Old York; preached there on Thursday, September 27; went on to Portsmouth, and preached there on Friday.
0.101	On Saturday morning he set out for Boston; but before he came to Newbury, where he had engaged to preach the next morning, he was pressed to preach along the way.
0.102	The house not being large enough to hold the people, he preached in an open field.
0.103	But having been infirm for several weeks, this so exhausted his strength that when he came to Newbury he could not get out of the ferryboat without the help of two men.
0.104	In the evening, however, he recovered his spirits, and appeared with his usual cheerfulness.
0.105	He went to his room at nine, his fixed time, from which no company could divert him, and slept better than he had for some weeks before.
0.106	He rose at four in the morning, September 30, and went into his private room; and his companion noticed that he was unusually long in private.
0.107	He left his private room, returned to his companion, threw himself on the bed, and lay there about ten minutes.
0.108	Then he fell on his knees and prayed most fervently to God that, if it was consistent with His will, he might that day finish his Master’s work.
0.109	He then asked his servant to call Mr. Parsons, the clergyman at whose house he was staying; but in a minute, before Mr. Parsons could reach him, he died, without a sigh or groan.
0.110	On the news of his death, six gentlemen set out for Newbury in order to bring his remains here: but he could not be moved; so his precious ashes must remain at Newbury.
0.111	Hundreds would have gone from this town to attend his funeral, had they not expected that he would be buried here....
0.112	May this stroke be sanctified to the Church of God in general, and to this province in particular!”
0.113	II. 1. We are, in the second place, to take some view of his character.
0.114	A little sketch of this was published soon afterward in the Boston Gazette; an extract of which is added here: — [“Little can be said of him but what every friend of vital Christianity who has sat under his ministry will attest.”]
0.115	“In his public labors he has, for many years, astonished the world with his eloquence and devotion.
0.116	With what divine pathos did he persuade the impenitent sinner to embrace the practice of piety and virtue!
0.117	[Filled with the spirit of grace, he] spoke from the heart, and, with a fervency of zeal perhaps unequaled since the days of the Apostles, [adorned the truths he delivered with the most graceful charms of rhetoric and oratory.]
0.118	In the pulpit he was unrivaled in his command of an ever-crowded audience.
0.119	Nor was he less agreeable and instructive in his private conversation: blessed with a remarkable ease of manner, willing to share, eager to edify.
0.120	May the rising generation catch a spark of that flame which shone with such distinguished luster in the spirit and practice of this faithful servant of the most high God!”
0.121	2. A more detailed, and equally just, account of his character has appeared in one of the English papers.
0.122	It may not be unwelcome to you if I add the substance of this as well: —
0.123	“The character of this truly pious person must be [deeply] impressed on the heart of every friend of vital religion.
0.124	In spite of a tender [and delicate] constitution, he continued, to the last day of his life, to preach with a frequency and fervor that seemed to exceed the natural strength of the most robust.
0.125	Being called to the exercise of his office at an age when most young men are only beginning to qualify themselves for it, he did not have time to make very considerable progress in the learned languages.
0.126	But this deficiency was amply made up for by a lively and fertile genius, by fervent zeal, and by a forceful and most persuasive delivery.
0.127	And though in the pulpit he often found it necessary to “persuade men” by “the terrors of the Lord,” he had nothing gloomy in his nature, being singularly cheerful, as well as charitable and tenderhearted.
0.128	He was as ready to relieve the bodily needs as the spiritual needs of those who came to him.
0.129	It ought also to be observed that he constantly urged every moral duty upon his hearers, particularly diligence in their various callings and obedience to their superiors.
0.130	He endeavored, by the most extraordinary efforts of preaching in different places, and even in the open fields, to rouse the lower classes of people from the utmost degree of inattention and ignorance to a sense of religion.
0.131	For this, and for his other labors, the name of GEORGE WHITEFIELD will long be remembered with esteem and veneration.”
0.132	3. That both these accounts are just and impartial will readily be granted; that is, as far as they go.
0.133	But they go little further than the outside of his character.
0.134	They show you the preacher, but not the man, the Christian, the saint of God.
0.135	May I be permitted to add a little on this subject, from a personal acquaintance of nearly forty years?
0.136	Indeed, I am fully aware how difficult it is to speak on so delicate a subject; what prudence is required to avoid both extremes, to say neither too little nor too much!
0.137	No, I know it is impossible to speak at all, to say either less or more, without incurring from some the former censure, and from others the latter.
0.138	Some will seriously think that too little is said; and others, that it is too much.
0.139	But without paying attention to this, I will speak just what I know, before Him to whom we must all give an account.
0.140	4. Mention has already been made of his unparalleled zeal, his tireless activity, his tenderheartedness toward the afflicted, and his charitableness toward the poor.
0.141	But should we not also mention his deep gratitude to all whom God had used as instruments of good to him? — of whom he did not cease to speak in the most respectful manner, even to his dying day.
0.142	Should we not mention that he had a heart capable of the most generous and the most tender friendship?
0.143	I have frequently thought that this, above all others, was the distinguishing part of his character.
0.144	How few have we known of so kind a temper, of such large and flowing affections!
0.145	Was it not chiefly by this that the hearts of others were so remarkably drawn and knit to him?
0.146	Can anything but love give birth to love?
0.147	This shone in his very face, and continually breathed in all his words, whether in public or in private.
0.148	Was it not this which, quick and penetrating as lightning, flew from heart to heart? which gave that life to his sermons, his conversations, his letters?
0.149	You are witnesses!
0.150	5. But away with the vile misconstruction of men of corrupt minds, who know of no love but what is earthly and sensual!
0.151	Let it be remembered, at the same time, that he was endowed with the most delicate and unblemished modesty.
0.152	His office called him to converse very frequently and at length with women as well as men; and those of every age and condition.
0.153	But his whole behavior toward them was a practical commentary on that advice of St. Paul to Timothy: “Appeal to the elder women as mothers, the younger as sisters, with all purity.”
0.154	6. Meanwhile, how suited to the friendliness of his spirit was the frankness and openness of his conversation! — although it was as far removed from rudeness on the one hand as from guile [and disguise] on the other.
0.155	Was not this frankness at once a fruit and a proof of his courage and fearlessness?
0.156	Armed with these, he did not fear the faces of men, but “used great plainness of speech” to persons of every rank and condition, high and low, rich and poor; endeavoring only “by the manifestation of the truth to commend himself to every man’s conscience in the sight of God.”
0.157	7. Nor was he afraid of labor or pain, any more than of “what man [could] do to him”; being equally
0.158	Patient in bearing ill and in doing well.
0.159	And this appeared in the steadiness with which he pursued whatever he undertook for his Master’s sake.
0.160	Witness one instance for all — the Orphan House in Georgia, which he began and completed in spite of all discouragements.
0.161	Indeed, in whatever concerned himself he was pliant and flexible.
0.162	In such a case he was “easy to be entreated”; easy either to be convinced or to be persuaded.
0.163	But he was immovable in the things of God, or wherever his conscience was concerned.
0.164	None could persuade him, any more than frighten him, to depart in the least point from that integrity which was inseparable from his whole character, and which governed all his words and actions.
0.165	In this he did
0.166	Stand like an iron pillar strong, / And steadfast as a wall of brass.
0.167	8. If it is asked what was the foundation of this integrity, or of his sincerity, courage, patience, and every other valuable and lovely quality, it is easy to give the answer.
0.168	It was not the excellence of his natural temperament, not the strength of his understanding; it was not the force of education; no, nor the advice of his friends: it was nothing other than faith in a bleeding Lord; “faith of the operation of God.”
0.169	It was “a lively hope of an inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, and that never fades away.”
0.170	It was “the love of God spread abroad in his heart by the Holy Spirit who was given to him,” filling his soul with tender, disinterested love for every child of man.
0.171	From this source arose that torrent of eloquence which frequently swept away all before it; from this came that astonishing force of persuasion which the most hardened sinners could not resist.
0.172	This it was which often made his “head as waters, and his eyes a fountain of tears.”
0.173	This it was which enabled him to pour out his soul in prayer in a manner peculiar to himself, with such fullness and ease united together, with such strength and variety both of thought and of expression.
0.174	9. I may close this point by observing what an honor it pleased God to put upon His faithful servant, by allowing him to declare His everlasting gospel in so many different countries, to such numbers of people, and with so great an effect on so many of their precious souls!
0.175	Have we read or heard of any person since the Apostles who testified to the gospel of the grace of God through so widely extended a space, through so large a part of the habitable world?
0.176	Have we read or heard of any person who called so many thousands, so many myriads, of sinners to repentance?
0.177	Above all, have we read or heard of any who has been a blessed instrument in His hand of bringing so many sinners from “darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to God”?
0.178	It is true that, were we to talk this way to the fashionable world, we would be judged to speak like barbarians.
0.179	But you understand the language of the country to which you are going, and where our dear friend has gone a little before us.
0.180	III. But how shall we make good use of this solemn providence?
0.181	This is the third thing we have to consider.
0.182	And the answer to this important question is easy (may God write it in all our hearts!).
0.183	By keeping close to the grand doctrines which he delivered; and by drinking in his spirit.
0.184	1. And, first, let us keep close to the grand scriptural doctrines which he delivered everywhere.
0.185	There are many doctrines of a less essential nature about which even the sincere children of God (such is the present weakness of human understanding) are divided, and have been for many ages.
0.186	In these matters we may think and let others think; we may “agree to disagree.”
0.187	But meanwhile, let us hold fast the essentials of “the faith which was once delivered to the saints,” and which this champion of God so strongly insisted on, at all times and in all places!
0.188	2. His fundamental point was, “Give God all the glory for whatever is good in man”; and, “In the business of salvation, set Christ as high and man as low as possible.”
0.189	With this point he and his friends at Oxford, the original Methodists, so called, set out.
0.190	Their grand principle was: there is no power (by nature) and no merit in man.
0.191	They insisted that all power to think, speak, or act rightly is in and from the Spirit of Christ; and all merit is (not in man, however high in grace, but merely) in the blood of Christ.
0.192	So he and they taught: there is no power in man, until it is given him from above, to do one good work, to speak one good word, or to form one good desire.
0.193	For it is not enough to say that all men are sick with sin: no, we are all “dead in trespasses and sins.”
0.194	It follows that all the children of men are “by nature children of wrath.”
0.195	We are all “guilty before God,” liable to death, temporal and eternal.
0.196	3. And we are all helpless, with regard both to the power and to the guilt of sin.
0.197	“For who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean one?”
0.198	None less than the Almighty.
0.199	Who can raise those who are dead, spiritually dead in sin?
0.200	None but He who raised us from the dust of the earth.
0.201	But on what grounds will He do this?
0.202	“Not on account of works of righteousness that we have done.”
0.203	“The dead cannot praise You, O Lord”; nor can they do anything for the sake of which they should be raised to life.
0.204	Whatever God does, therefore, He does merely for the sake of His well-beloved Son: “He was wounded for our transgressions, He was bruised for our iniquities.”
0.205	He Himself “bore” all “our sins in His own body on the tree.”
0.206	He “was delivered up for our offenses, and was raised again for our justification.”
0.207	Here, then, is the sole meritorious cause of every blessing we do or can enjoy; in particular of our pardon and acceptance with God, of our full and free justification.
0.208	But by what means do we come to have a share in what Christ has done and suffered?
0.209	“Not by works, so that no man may boast”; but by faith alone.
0.210	“We conclude,” says the Apostle, “that a man is justified by faith, without the works of the law.”
0.211	And “to as many as” thus “receive Him, He gives power to become the sons of God, even to those who believe in His name; who are born, not of the will of man, but of God.”
0.212	4. And “unless a man is” thus “born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God.”
0.213	But all who are thus “born of the Spirit” have “the kingdom of God within them.”
0.214	Christ sets up His kingdom in their hearts: “righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Spirit.”
0.215	That “mind is in them which was in Christ Jesus,” enabling them to “walk as Christ also walked.”
0.216	His indwelling Spirit makes them both holy in heart and “holy in all manner of conduct.”
0.217	But still, since all this is a free gift, through the righteousness and blood of Christ, there is eternally the same reason to remember: “He that glories, let him glory in the Lord.”
0.218	5. You are not unaware that these are the fundamental doctrines which he insisted on everywhere.
0.219	And may they not be summed up, as it were, in two words — the new birth, and justification by faith?
0.220	Let us insist on these with all boldness, at all times and in all places — in public (those of us who are called to it), and at every opportunity in private.
0.221	Keep close to these good, old, unfashionable doctrines, however many contradict and blaspheme.
0.222	Go on, my brethren, in the “name of the Lord, and in the power of His might.”
0.223	With all care and diligence “keep safe that which is committed to your trust,” knowing that “heaven and earth will pass away, but this truth will not pass away.”
0.224	6. But will it be enough to keep close to his doctrines, however pure they are?
0.225	Is there not a point of still greater importance than this, namely, to drink in his spirit? — in this to be a follower of him, even as he was of Christ?
0.226	Without this, the purity of our doctrines would only increase our condemnation.
0.227	This, therefore, is the principal thing — to copy his spirit.
0.228	And granting that in some points we must be content to admire what we cannot imitate, yet in many others we may, through the same free grace, be partakers of the same blessing.
0.229	Conscious, then, of your own needs and of His bountiful love, who “gives liberally and does not upbraid,” cry to Him who works all in all for a measure of the same precious faith; of the same zeal and activity; the same tenderheartedness, charitableness, and heartfelt mercy.
0.230	Wrestle with God for some measure of the same grateful, friendly, affectionate temper; of the same openness, simplicity, and godly sincerity; “love without pretense.”
0.231	Wrestle on, until the power from on high works in you the same steady courage and patience; and above all, because it is the crown of all, the same unvarying integrity!
0.232	7. Is there any other fruit of the grace of God with which he was eminently endowed, and the lack of which among the children of God he frequently and passionately lamented?
0.233	There is one, that is, catholic love: that sincere and tender affection which is due to all those who, we have reason to believe, are children of God by faith; in other words, all those, in every denomination, who “fear God and work righteousness.”
0.234	He longed to see all who had “tasted of the good word” be of a true catholic spirit — a word little understood, and still less experienced, by many who have it frequently in their mouths.
0.235	Who is the one who answers to this description?
0.236	Who is the man of a catholic spirit?
0.237	One who loves as friends, as brethren in the Lord, as joint partakers of the present kingdom of heaven, and fellow heirs of His eternal kingdom, all, of whatever opinion, mode of worship, or congregation, who believe in the Lord Jesus; who love God and man; who, rejoicing to please God and fearing to offend Him, are careful to abstain from evil, and zealous for good works.
0.238	He is a man of a truly catholic spirit who bears all these continually on his heart; who, having an inexpressible tenderness for their persons and an earnest desire for their welfare, does not cease to commend them to God in prayer, as well as to plead their cause before men; who speaks comfortingly to them, and labors by all his words to strengthen their hands in God.
0.239	He assists them to the utmost of his power in all things, spiritual and temporal; he is ready to “spend and be spent” for them; yes, “to lay down his life for his brethren.”
0.240	8. How lovely a character this is!
0.241	How desirable to every child of God!
0.242	But why, then, is it so rarely found?
0.243	How is it that there are so few instances of it?
0.244	Indeed, supposing we have tasted the love of God, how can any of us rest until it is our own?
0.245	Why, there is a subtle device by which Satan persuades thousands that they may stop short of it and yet be guiltless.
0.246	It is well if many who are present here are not in this “snare of the devil, taken captive at his will.”
0.247	“Oh yes,” says one, “I have all this love for those I believe to be children of God; but I will never believe that anyone is a child of God who belongs to that vile congregation!
0.248	Can he, do you think, be a child of God who holds such detestable opinions? or he who joins in such senseless and superstitious, if not idolatrous, worship?”
0.249	So we can justify ourselves in one sin by adding a second to it!
0.250	We excuse the lack of love in ourselves by laying the blame on others!
0.251	To disguise our own devilish temper, we pronounce our brethren children of the devil!
0.252	Oh, beware of this! — and if you are already caught in the snare, escape out of it as soon as possible!
0.253	Go and learn that truly catholic love which “is not rash,” or hasty in judging; that love which “thinks no evil”; which “believes and hopes all things”; which makes all the allowances for others that we desire others to make for us!
0.254	Then we shall recognize the grace of God which is in every man, whatever his opinion or mode of worship: then all who fear God will be near and dear to us “in the tender affection of Jesus Christ.”
0.255	9. Was not this the spirit of our dear friend?
0.256	And why should it not be ours?
0.257	O You God of love, how long shall Your people be a byword among the heathen?
0.258	How long shall they laugh us to scorn, and say, “See how these Christians love one another!”
0.259	When will You roll away our reproach?
0.260	Shall the sword devour forever?
0.261	How long will it be before You bid Your people return from “following each other”?
0.262	Now, at least, “let all the people stand still, and pursue their brethren no more!”
0.263	But whatever others do, let all of us, my brethren, hear the voice of him who, being dead, still speaks!
0.264	Suppose you hear him say: “Now, at least, be followers of me as I was of Christ!
0.265	Let brother “no more lift up sword against brother, nor know war any more!”
0.266	Rather, put on, as the elect of God, heartfelt mercy, humility of mind, brotherly kindness, gentleness, long-suffering, bearing with one another in love.
0.267	Let the time past suffice for strife, envy, and contention; for biting and devouring one another.
0.268	Blessed be God that you have not long ago been consumed by one another!
0.269	From now on keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace.”
0.270	10. O God, with You no word is impossible!
0.271	You do whatever pleases You!
0.272	Oh, that You would cause the mantle of Your prophet, whom You have taken up, now to fall upon us who remain!
0.273	“Where is the Lord, the God of Elijah?”
0.274	Let his spirit rest upon these Your servants!
0.275	Show that You are the God who answers by fire!
0.276	Let the fire of Your love fall on every heart!
0.277	And because we love You, let us love one another with a “love stronger than death!”
0.278	Take away from us “all anger, and wrath, and bitterness; all clamor and evil speaking!”
0.279	Let Your Spirit so rest upon us that from this hour we may be “kind to each other, tender-hearted, forgiving one another, even as God, for Christ’s sake, has forgiven us!”
H:0.50	A Hymn
0.280	1 Servant of God, well done! / Your glorious warfare’s past; / The battle’s fought, the race is won, / And you are crowned at last; / Of all your heart’s desire / Triumphantly possessed, / Lodged by the ministering choir / In your Redeemer’s breast.
0.281	2 In condescending love, / Your ceaseless prayer He heard; / And called you suddenly away / To your complete reward: / Ready to bring the peace, / Your beautiful feet were shod, / When mercy signed your soul’s release, / And caught you up to God.
0.282	3 With saints enthroned on high, / You now your Lord proclaim, / And still “To God salvation!” cry, / “Salvation to the Lamb!” / O happy, happy soul! / In ecstasies of praise, / As long as eternal ages roll, / You see your Savior’s face!
0.283	4 Redeemed from earth and pain, / Ah! when shall we ascend, / And all in Jesus’ presence reign / With our translated friend? / Come, Lord, and quickly come! / And, when in You complete, / Receive Your longing servants home, / To triumph at Your feet!
