0.1	“If your brother sins against you, go and tell him his fault between you and him alone: if he hears you, you have gained your brother.
0.2	But if he will not hear, take with you one or two more, that in the mouth of two or three witnesses every word may be established.
0.3	And if he will not hear them, tell it to the church.
0.4	But if he does not hear the church, let him be to you as a heathen man and a tax collector.” Matt. 18:15–17
0.5	1. “Speak evil of no man,” says the great apostle: as plain a command as, “You shall do no murder.”
0.6	But who, even among Christians, pays attention to this command?
0.7	Indeed, how few are there who so much as understand it?
0.8	What is evil-speaking? It is not, as some suppose, the same as lying or slandering.
0.9	All a man says may be as true as the Bible; and yet the saying of it is evil-speaking.
0.10	For evil-speaking is neither more nor less than speaking evil of an absent person; relating something evil which was really done or said by one who is not present when it is related.
0.11	Suppose, having seen a man drunk, or heard him curse or swear, I tell this when he is absent; it is evil-speaking.
0.12	In our language this is also, by an extremely fitting name, called backbiting.
0.13	Nor is there any real difference between this and what we usually call tale-bearing.
0.14	If the tale is delivered in a soft and quiet manner (perhaps with expressions of goodwill to the person, and of hope that things may not be quite so bad), then we call it whispering.
0.15	But in whatever manner it is done, the thing is the same: the same in substance, if not in circumstance.
0.16	Still it is evil-speaking; still this command, “Speak evil of no man,” is trampled underfoot, if we relate to another the fault of a third person when he is not present to answer for himself.
0.17	2. And how extremely common is this sin among all ranks and classes of people!
0.18	How continually do high and low, rich and poor, wise and foolish, learned and unlearned run into it!
0.19	Persons who differ from each other in everything else nevertheless agree in this.
0.20	How few are there who can testify before God, “I am clear in this matter; I have always set a watch before my mouth, and kept the door of my lips!”
0.21	What conversation of any considerable length do you hear in which evil-speaking is not one ingredient? And that even among persons who, in general, have the fear of God before their eyes, and really do desire to have a conscience without offense toward God and toward man.
0.22	3. And the very commonness of this sin makes it difficult to avoid.
0.23	As we are surrounded by it on every side, so, if we are not deeply aware of the danger and continually guarding against it, we are liable to be carried away by the torrent.
0.24	In this instance almost the whole of mankind is, as it were, in a conspiracy against us.
0.25	And their example steals upon us, we do not know how, so that we imperceptibly slide into imitating it.
0.26	Besides, it is recommended from within as well as from without.
0.27	There is scarcely any wrong disposition in the mind of man which may not at times be gratified by it, and consequently incline us to it.
0.28	It gratifies our pride to relate those faults of others of which we think ourselves not guilty.
0.29	Anger, resentment, and all unkind tempers are indulged by speaking against those with whom we are displeased; and, in many cases, by reciting the sins of their neighbors, men indulge their own foolish and hurtful desires.
0.30	4. Evil-speaking is all the more difficult to avoid because it frequently attacks us in disguise.
0.31	We speak this way out of a noble, generous (it is well if we do not say holy) indignation against these vile creatures!
0.32	We commit sin from mere hatred of sin!
0.33	We serve the devil out of pure zeal for God!
0.34	It is merely in order to punish the wicked that we run into this wickedness.
0.35	“So do the passions” (as someone puts it) “all justify themselves,” and palm sin off on us under the veil of holiness!
0.36	5. But is there no way to avoid the snare?
0.37	Unquestionably there is. Our blessed Lord has marked out a plain way for His followers in the words quoted above.
0.38	No one who walks carefully and steadily in this path will ever fall into evil-speaking.
0.39	This rule is either an infallible preventive or a certain cure of it.
0.40	In the preceding verses our Lord had said, “Woe to the world because of offenses”: unspeakable misery will arise in the world from this deadly fountain (offenses are all things by which anyone is turned out of, or hindered in, the ways of God): “For it must be that offenses come”: such is the nature of things; such is the wickedness, folly, and weakness of mankind: “But woe to that man”: miserable is that man, “by whom the offense comes.”
0.41	“Therefore if your hand, your foot, your eye causes you to offend”: if the dearest enjoyment, the most beloved and useful person, turns you out of or hinders you in the way, “pluck it out”: cut them off, and cast them from you.
0.42	But how can we avoid giving offense to some, and being offended at others?
0.43	Especially, suppose they are quite in the wrong, and we see it with our own eyes?
0.44	Our Lord here teaches us how: He lays down a sure method of avoiding offenses and evil-speaking together.
0.45	“If your brother sins against you, go and tell him of his fault between you and him alone: if he will hear you, you have gained your brother.
0.46	But if he will not hear you, take with you one or two more, that by the mouth of two or three witnesses every word may be established.
0.47	And if he will not hear them, tell it to the church: but if he will not hear the church, let him be to you as a heathen man and a tax collector.”
0.48	I. 1. First, “If your brother sins against you, go and tell him of his fault between you and him alone.”
0.49	The most literal way of following this first rule, where it is practicable, is the best. Therefore, if you see with your own eyes a brother, a fellow Christian, commit undeniable sin, or hear it with your own ears, so that it is impossible for you to doubt the fact, then your part is plain: take the very first opportunity of going to him; and, if you can have access, “tell him of his fault between you and him alone.”
0.50	Indeed, great care must be taken that this is done in a right spirit and in a right manner.
0.51	The success of a reproof greatly depends on the spirit in which it is given.
0.52	Do not, therefore, be lacking in earnest prayer to God that it may be given in a lowly spirit, with a deep, piercing conviction that it is God alone who makes you differ, and that if any good is done by what is now spoken, God does it Himself.
0.53	Pray that He would guard your heart, enlighten your mind, and direct your tongue to such words as He may be pleased to bless.
0.54	See that you speak in a meek as well as a lowly spirit; for “the wrath of man does not work the righteousness of God.”
0.55	If he is “overtaken in a fault,” he can be restored in no other way than “in the spirit of meekness.”
0.56	If he opposes the truth, yet he cannot be brought to the knowledge of it except by gentleness.
0.57	Still speak in a spirit of tender love, “which many waters cannot quench.”
0.58	If love is not conquered, it conquers all things.
0.59	Who can tell the force of love?
0.60	Love can bow down the stubborn neck, / Convert the stone to flesh; / Soften, and melt, and pierce, and break / A heart as hard as diamond.
0.61	Confirm, then, your love toward him, and you will thereby “heap coals of fire on his head.”
0.62	2. But see that the manner in which you speak is also according to the gospel of Christ.
0.63	Avoid everything in look, gesture, word, and tone of voice that smacks of pride or self-sufficiency.
0.64	Carefully avoid everything magisterial or dogmatic, everything that looks like arrogance or presumption.
0.65	Beware of the most distant approach to disdain, domineering, or contempt.
0.66	With equal care avoid all appearance of anger; and though you use great plainness of speech, yet let there be no reproach, no railing accusation, no sign of any warmth but that of love.
0.67	Above all, let there be no shadow of hate or ill will, no bitterness or sourness of expression; but use the air and language of sweetness as well as gentleness, so that all may appear to flow from love in the heart.
0.68	And yet this sweetness need not hinder you from speaking in the most serious and solemn manner; as far as possible, in the very words of the oracles of God (for there are none like them), and as under the eye of Him who is coming to judge the living and the dead.
0.69	3. If you do not have an opportunity of speaking to him in person, or cannot have access, you may do it by a messenger: by a mutual friend in whose prudence as well as uprightness you can thoroughly confide.
0.70	Such a person, speaking in your name, and in the spirit and manner described above, may answer the same end and, to a good degree, make up for your lack of service.
0.71	Only beware that you do not pretend a lack of opportunity in order to shun the cross; nor take it for granted that you cannot have access, without ever making the attempt.
0.72	Whenever you can speak in your own person, it is far better.
0.73	But you should rather do it through another than not at all: this way is better than none.
0.74	4. But what if you can neither speak yourself nor find such a messenger as you can confide in?
0.75	If this is really the case, it then only remains to write.
0.76	And there may be some circumstances which make this the most advisable way of speaking.
0.77	One of these circumstances is when the person with whom we have to deal is of so warm and impetuous a temper that he does not easily bear reproof, especially from an equal or an inferior.
0.78	But it may be so introduced and softened in writing as to make it far more tolerable.
0.79	Besides, many will read the very same words which they could not bear to hear.
0.80	It does not give so violent a shock to their pride, nor touch their honor so keenly.
0.81	And suppose it makes little impression at first, they will perhaps give it a second reading and, upon further consideration, lay to heart what they disregarded before.
0.82	If you add your name, this is nearly the same thing as going to him and speaking in person.
0.83	And this should always be done, unless it is made improper by some very particular reason.
0.84	5. It should be well observed, not only that this is a step which our Lord absolutely commands us to take, but that He commands us to take this step first, before we attempt any other.
0.85	No alternative is allowed, no choice of anything else: this is the way; walk in it.
0.86	It is true, He directs us, if need requires, to take two other steps; but they are to be taken successively after this step, and neither of them before it: much less are we to take any other step, either before this or besides it.
0.87	To do anything else, or not to do this, is therefore equally inexcusable.
0.88	6. Do not think to excuse yourself for taking an entirely different step by saying, “Why, I did not speak to anyone until I was so burdened that I could not refrain.”
0.89	You were burdened! It was no wonder that you should be, unless your conscience was seared; for you were under the guilt of sin, of disobeying a plain commandment of God!
0.90	You ought immediately to have gone and told “your brother of his fault between you and him alone.”
0.91	If you did not, how could you be anything but burdened (unless your heart was utterly hardened), while you were trampling the command of God underfoot, and “hating your brother in your heart”?
0.92	And what a way have you found to unburden yourself?
0.93	God reproves you for a sin of omission, for not telling your brother of his fault; and you comfort yourself under His reproof by a sin of commission, by telling your brother’s fault to another person!
0.94	Ease bought by sin is a costly purchase!
0.95	I trust in God that you will have no ease, but will be burdened all the more, until you “go to your brother and tell him,” and no one else.
0.96	7. I know of only one exception to this rule: there may be a peculiar case in which it is necessary to accuse the guilty, though absent, in order to preserve the innocent.
0.97	For instance: you are acquainted with the design which a man has against the property or life of his neighbor.
0.98	Now, the case may be so circumstanced that there is no other way of hindering that design from taking effect but by making it known, without delay, to him against whom it is laid.
0.99	In this case, therefore, this rule is set aside, as is that of the apostle, “Speak evil of no man”; and it is lawful, indeed, it is our bounden duty, to speak evil of an absent person, in order to prevent his doing evil to others and to himself at the same time.
0.100	But remember, meanwhile, that all evil-speaking is, in its own nature, deadly poison.
0.101	Therefore, if you are sometimes compelled to use it as a medicine, yet use it with fear and trembling, seeing it is so dangerous a medicine that nothing but absolute necessity can excuse your using it at all.
0.102	Accordingly, use it as seldom as possible, never except when there is such a necessity; and even then use as little of it as possible, only as much as is necessary for the intended end.
0.103	At all other times, “go and tell him of his fault between you and him alone.”
0.104	II. 1. But what “if he will not hear”?
0.105	If he repays evil for good?
0.106	If he is enraged rather than convinced?
0.107	What if he hears to no purpose, and still goes on in the evil of his way?
0.108	We must expect this will frequently be the case; the mildest and tenderest reproof will have no effect; but the blessing we wished for another will return into our own bosom.
0.109	And what are we to do then?
0.110	Our Lord has given us a clear and full direction.
0.111	Then “take with you one or two more”: this is the second step.
0.112	Take one or two whom you know to be of a loving spirit, lovers of God and of their neighbor.
0.113	See, likewise, that they are of a lowly spirit, and “clothed with humility.”
0.114	Let them also be such as are meek and gentle, patient and longsuffering; not apt to “return evil for evil, or insult for insult, but on the contrary blessing.”
0.115	Let them be men of understanding, such as are endowed with wisdom from above; and unbiased men, free from partiality, free from prejudice of any kind.
0.116	Care should likewise be taken that both the persons and their characters are well known to him; and let those who are acceptable to him be chosen in preference to any others.
0.117	2. Love will dictate the manner in which they should proceed, according to the nature of the case.
0.118	Nor can any one particular manner be prescribed for all cases.
0.119	But perhaps, in general, one might advise that before they enter upon the matter itself, they mildly and affectionately declare that they have no anger or prejudice toward him, and that it is merely from a principle of goodwill that they now come, or concern themselves at all with his affairs.
0.120	To make this the more apparent, they might then calmly listen to your repetition of your former conversation with him, and to what he said in his own defense, before they attempted to determine anything.
0.121	After this they would be better able to judge in what manner to proceed, “that by the mouth of two or three witnesses every word might be established”; that whatever you have said may have its full force by the additional weight of their authority.
0.122	3. To this end, may they not (1)
0.123	Briefly repeat what you said, and what he answered?
0.124	(2) Enlarge upon, explain, and confirm the reasons which you had given?
0.125	(3) Give weight to your reproof, showing how just, how kind, and how timely it was?
0.126	And, lastly, enforce the advice and persuasions which you had attached to it?
0.127	And these may likewise hereafter, if need should require, bear witness to what was spoken.
0.128	4. With regard to this, as well as the preceding rule, we may observe that our Lord gives us no choice, leaves us no alternative, but expressly commands us to do this, and nothing else in its place.
0.129	He likewise directs us when to do this, neither sooner nor later: namely, after we have taken the first step, and before we have taken the third.
0.130	It is only then that we are authorized to relate the evil another has done to those whom we desire to take part with us in this great instance of brotherly love.
0.131	But let us take care how we relate it to any other person until both these steps have been taken.
0.132	If we neglect to take these, or if we take any others, what wonder if we are burdened still?
0.133	For we are sinners against God and against our neighbor; and however fairly we may color it, yet, if we have any conscience, our sin will find us out and bring a burden upon our soul.
0.134	III. 1. That we may be thoroughly instructed in this weighty affair, our Lord has given us a still further direction: “If he will not hear them,” then, and not until then, “tell it to the church.”
0.135	This is the third step.
0.136	The whole question is how this word, “the church,” is to be understood here.
0.137	But the very nature of the thing will determine this beyond all reasonable doubt.
0.138	You cannot tell it to the national Church, the whole body of people called “the Church of England.”
0.139	Nor would it answer any Christian end if you could; this, therefore, is not the meaning of the word.
0.140	Neither can you tell it to that whole body of people in England with whom you have a more immediate connection.
0.141	Nor, indeed, would this answer any good end: the word, therefore, is not to be understood this way.
0.142	It would not answer any valuable end to tell the faults of every particular member to the church (if you would call it that), the congregation or society united together in London.
0.143	It remains that you tell it to the elder or elders of the church, to those who are overseers of that flock of Christ to which you both belong, who watch over your soul and his, “as those who must give account.”
0.144	And this should be done, if it conveniently can, in the presence of the person concerned, and, though plainly, yet with all the tenderness and love which the nature of the thing will allow.
0.145	It properly belongs to their office to decide concerning the behavior of those under their care, and to rebuke, according to the demerit of the offense, “with all authority.”
0.146	When, therefore, you have done this, you have done all that the word of God, or the law of love, requires of you: you are not now a partaker of his sin; but if he perishes, his blood is on his own head.
0.147	2. Here, also, let it be observed that this, and no other, is the third step which we are to take; and that we are to take it in its order after the other two; not before the second, much less the first, unless in some very particular circumstance.
0.148	Indeed, in one case, the second step may coincide with this: they may be, in a manner, one and the same.
0.149	The elder or elders of the church may be so connected with the offending brother that they may set aside the necessity, and take the place, of the one or two witnesses; so that it may suffice to tell it to them after you have told it to your brother, “between you and him alone.”
0.150	3. When you have done this, you have delivered your own soul.
0.151	“If he will not hear the church,” if he persists in his sin, “let him be to you as a heathen man and a tax collector.”
0.152	You are under no obligation to think of him any more, except when you commend him to God in prayer.
0.153	You need not speak of him any more, but leave him to his own Master.
0.154	Indeed, you still owe him, as you owe all other heathens, earnest, tender goodwill.
0.155	You owe him courtesy and, as occasion offers, all the offices of humanity.
0.156	But have no friendship, no familiarity with him; no other dealings than with an open heathen.
0.157	4. But if this is the rule by which Christians walk, which is the land where Christians live?
0.158	You may possibly find a few scattered here and there who make it a matter of conscience to observe it.
0.159	But how very few!
0.160	How thinly scattered over the face of the earth!
0.161	And where is there any body of people that universally walks by it?
0.162	Can we find them in Europe?
0.163	Or, to go no further, in Great Britain or Ireland?
0.164	I fear not: I fear we may search these kingdoms throughout, and yet search in vain.
0.165	Alas for the Christian world!
0.166	Alas for Protestants, for Reformed Christians!
0.167	Oh, “who will rise up with me against the wicked?”
0.168	“Who will take God’s part” against the evil-speakers?
0.169	Are you the man?
0.170	By the grace of God, will you be one who is not carried away by the torrent?
0.171	Are you fully determined, God being your helper, from this very hour to set a watch, a continual “watch, before your mouth, and keep the door of your lips”?
0.172	From this hour will you walk by this rule, “Speaking evil of no man”?
0.173	If you see your brother do evil, will you “tell him of his fault between you and him alone”?
0.174	Afterwards, “take one or two witnesses,” and only then “tell it to the church”?
0.175	If this is the full purpose of your heart, then learn one lesson well: “Hear evil of no man.”
0.176	If there were no hearers, there would be no speakers, of evil.
0.177	And is not (according to the common proverb) the receiver as bad as the thief?
0.178	If, then, anyone begins to speak evil in your hearing, check him immediately.
0.179	Refuse to hear the voice of the charmer, however sweetly he charms; let him use ever so soft a manner, so mild an accent, ever so many professions of goodwill for the one whom he is stabbing in the dark, whom he strikes under the fifth rib!
0.180	Resolutely refuse to hear, though the whisperer complains of being “burdened till he speaks.”
0.181	Burdened! You fool! Are you in labor with your cursed secret, as a woman is in labor with child?
0.182	Go, then, and be delivered of your burden in the way the Lord has ordained!
0.183	First, “go and tell your brother of his fault between you and him alone”; next, “take with you one or two” mutual friends, and tell him in their presence; if neither of these steps takes effect, then “tell it to the church.”
0.184	But, at the peril of your soul, tell it to no one else, either before or after, except in that one exempted case, when it is absolutely necessary to preserve the innocent!
0.185	Why should you burden another as well as yourself, by making him a partaker of your sin?
0.186	5. Oh, that all of you who bear the reproach of Christ, who are in derision called Methodists, would set an example to the so-called Christian world, at least in this one instance!
0.187	Put away evil-speaking, tale-bearing, whispering: let none of them proceed out of your mouth!
0.188	See that you “speak evil of no man”; of the absent, nothing but good.
0.189	If you must be distinguished, whether you want to be or not, let this be the distinguishing mark of a Methodist: “He censures no man behind his back: by this fruit you may know him.”
0.190	What a blessed effect of this self-denial we would quickly feel in our hearts!
0.191	How would our “peace flow like a river,” when we thus “followed peace with all men”!
0.192	How would the love of God abound in our own souls, while we thus confirmed our love to our brethren!
0.193	And what an effect it would have on all who were united together in the name of the Lord Jesus!
0.194	How would brotherly love continually increase, when this great hindrance to it was removed!
0.195	All the members of Christ’s mystical body would then naturally care for each other.
0.196	“If one member suffered, all would suffer with it; if one was honored, all would rejoice with it”; and everyone would love his brother “with a pure heart fervently.”
0.197	Nor is this all: what an effect this might have even on the wild, unthinking world!
0.198	How soon would they discover in us what they could not find among all the thousands of their brethren, and cry (as Julian the Apostate did to his heathen courtiers), “See how these Christians love one another!”
0.199	By this chiefly would God convince the world, and prepare them also for His kingdom; as we may easily learn from those remarkable words in our Lord’s last, solemn prayer: “I pray for those who will believe in Me, that they all may be one, as You, Father, are in Me, and I in You; that the world may believe that You have sent Me!”
0.200	[John 17:21] May the Lord hasten the time!
0.201	May the Lord enable us thus to love one another, not only “in word and in tongue, but in deed and in truth,” even as Christ has loved us.
