0.1	“Though I bestow all my goods to feed the poor, and though I give my body to be burned, and have not love, it profits me nothing.”
0.2	1 Corinthians 13:3.
0.3	There is great reason to fear that it will one day be said of most of you who are present here, that this scripture, like all those you have heard before, profited you nothing.
0.4	Some, perhaps, are not serious enough to pay attention to it; some who do pay attention will not believe it; some who do believe it will still think it a hard saying, and so forget it as soon as they can; and of those few who receive it gladly for a time, some, having no root of humility or self-denial, will fall away when persecution arises because of the word, rather than suffer for it.
0.5	Indeed, even of those who pay attention to it, who believe, remember, yes, and receive it so deeply into their hearts that it takes root there, endures the heat of temptation, and begins to bear fruit, still not all will bring forth fruit to perfection.
0.6	The cares or pleasures of the world, and the desire for other things (perhaps not felt until then), will grow up with the word and choke it.
0.7	Nor am I who speak the word of God any more secure from these dangers than you who hear it.
0.8	I, too, have to lament “an evil heart of unbelief.”
0.9	And whenever God allows persecution to arise, yes, even if it were only the slight persecution of reproach, I may be the first to be offended.
0.10	Or, if I am enabled to endure this, yet if He should let loose the cares of the world upon me, or if He should cease to guard me against those pleasures that do not lead to Him, and the desire for other things [than knowing and loving Him], I would surely be overwhelmed, and, having preached to others, I myself would be a castaway.
0.11	Why then do I speak this word at all?
0.12	Why? Because a stewardship of the gospel has been committed to me: and though I do not know what I shall do tomorrow, today I will preach the gospel.
0.13	And with regard to you, my commission reads like this: “Son of man, I am sending you to them, and you shall say to them, ‘Thus says the Lord God’ — whether they will hear, or whether they will refrain.”
0.14	Thus says the Lord God: “Whoever you are who would enter into life, keep the commandments.”
0.15	(In order to do this, “believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and you will be saved.”)
0.16	“Do not forsake the assembling together, as is the manner of some.”
0.17	In secret, likewise, “pray to your Father who sees in secret,” and “pour out your heart before Him.”
0.18	Make My word “a lantern to your feet and a light to your paths.”
0.19	Keep it “in your heart and in your mouth, when you sit in your house, when you walk by the way, when you lie down, and when you rise up.”
0.20	“Turn to Me with fasting,” as well as prayer; and, in obedience to your dying Redeemer, by eating that bread and drinking that cup, “show forth the Lord’s death until He comes.”
0.21	By the power you will receive from on high through these means, do all the things that are commanded in the Law, and avoid all those things that are forbidden in it, knowing that “if you offend in one point, you are guilty of all.”
0.22	“Do not forget to do good and to distribute” — yes, while you have time, do all the good you can to all men.
0.23	Then “deny yourself, take up your cross daily”; and, if called to it, “resist to the point of blood.”
0.24	And when each of you can say, “All this I have done,” then let him say further to himself (words at which not only someone like Felix, but the holiest soul on earth might tremble): “Though I bestow all my goods to feed the poor, and though I give my body to be burned, and have not love, it profits me nothing.”
0.25	It therefore concerns us all in the highest degree to know,
0.26	I. The full sense of those words, “Though I bestow all my goods to feed the poor, and though I give my body to be burned”;
0.27	II. The true meaning of the word love; and,
0.28	III. In what sense it can be said that without love all this profits us nothing.
0.29	I. As to the first: It must be observed that the word used by St. Paul properly means to divide into small pieces, and then to distribute what has been divided in this way; and consequently it implies not merely stripping ourselves all at once of all the worldly goods we enjoy, whether from a fit of distaste for the world or a sudden burst of devotion, but an act of choice, and that choice coolly and steadily carried out.
0.30	It may also imply that this is done not out of vanity, but in part from a right principle; namely, from a purpose to carry out the command of God, and a desire to obtain His kingdom.
0.31	It must further be observed that the word give means actually to deliver a thing according to agreement; and accordingly it implies, like the preceding word, not a hasty, thoughtless action, but one performed with open eyes and a determined heart, in keeping with a resolution taken beforehand.
0.32	The full sense of the words, therefore, is this — he who has ears to hear, let him hear: “Though I should give all the substance of my house to feed the poor; though I should do so after mature choice and deliberation; though I should spend my life in dealing it out to them with my own hands, yes, and that from a principle of obedience; though I should suffer, with the same aim, not only reproach and shame, not only bonds and imprisonment, and all this by my own continued act and deed, not accepting deliverance, but, moreover, death itself — yes, death inflicted in the manner most terrible to nature; yet with all this, if I do not have love (the love of God, and the love of all mankind, ‘shed abroad in my heart by the Holy Spirit given to me’), it profits me nothing.”
0.33	II. Let us inquire what this love is — what is the true meaning of the word?
0.34	We may consider it either with regard to its properties or its effects: and so that there may be no possibility of our being mistaken, we will not regard the judgment of men at all, but go to our Lord Himself for an account of the nature of love, and, for its effects, to His inspired Apostle.
0.35	The love which our Lord requires in all His followers is the love of God and man — of God for His own sake, and of man for God’s sake.
0.36	Now, what is it to love God, but to delight in Him, to rejoice in His will, to desire continually to please Him, to seek and find our happiness in Him, and to thirst day and night for a fuller enjoyment of Him?
0.37	As to the measure of this love, our Lord has clearly told us, “You shall love the Lord your God with all your heart.”
0.38	Not that we are to love or delight in no one but Him: for He has commanded us not only to love our neighbor, that is, all men, as ourselves — to desire and pursue their happiness as sincerely and steadily as our own — but also to love many of His creatures in the strictest sense; to delight in them, to enjoy them: only in such a manner and measure as we know and feel does not unfit us for, but prepares us for, the enjoyment of Him.
0.39	Thus, then, we are called to love God with all our heart.
0.40	The effects or properties of this love the Apostle describes in the chapter before us.
0.41	And since all these are infallible marks by which anyone may judge himself, whether he has this love or does not have it, they deserve our deepest consideration.
0.42	“Love suffers long,” or is longsuffering.
0.43	If you love your neighbor for God’s sake, you will bear long with his weaknesses: if he lacks wisdom, you will pity and not despise him; if he is in error, you will gently try to recover him, without any sharpness or reproach; if he is overtaken in a fault, you will labor to restore him in a spirit of meekness; and if perhaps that cannot be done soon, you will have patience with him, in case God may perhaps at length bring him to the knowledge and love of the truth.
0.44	In all provocations, whether from the weakness or the malice of men, you will show yourself a pattern of gentleness and meekness; and however often they are repeated, you will not be overcome by evil, but will overcome evil with good.
0.45	Let no one deceive you with empty words: he who is not longsuffering in this way does not have love.
0.46	Again: “Love is kind.”
0.47	Whoever feels the love of God and man shed abroad in his heart feels an ardent and uninterrupted thirst for the happiness of all his fellow creatures.
0.48	His soul melts away with the very fervent desire he continually has to promote it; and out of the abundance of the heart his mouth speaks.
0.49	On his tongue is the law of kindness.
0.50	The same is stamped on all his actions.
0.51	The flame within is continually working its way out, and spreading abroad more and more, in every act of goodwill to all with whom he has to do.
0.52	So that whether he thinks or speaks, or whatever he does, it all points to the same end — advancing, by every possible means, the happiness of all his fellow creatures.
0.53	Therefore do not deceive your own souls: he who is not kind in this way does not have love.
0.54	Further: “Love does not envy.”
0.55	This, indeed, is implied when it is said, “Love is kind.”
0.56	For kindness and envy are incompatible: they can no more live together than light and darkness.
0.57	If we earnestly desire all happiness for all, we cannot be grieved at the happiness of anyone.
0.58	The fulfilling of our desire will be sweet to our soul; so far will we be from being pained by it.
0.59	If we are always doing what good we can for our neighbor, and wishing we could do more, it is impossible that we should resent any good he receives: indeed, it will be the very joy of our heart.
0.60	However much, then, we may flatter ourselves or one another, he who envies does not have love.
0.61	It follows: “Love does not vaunt itself”; or rather, is not rash or hasty in judging: for this is indeed the true meaning of the word.
0.62	All who love their neighbor for God’s sake will not easily form a bad opinion of anyone to whom they wish all good, spiritual as well as temporal.
0.63	They cannot condemn him even in their heart without evidence; nor on slight evidence either; nor, indeed, on any evidence, without first, if possible, bringing him and his accuser face to face, or at least informing him of the accusation and letting him speak for himself.
0.64	Every one of you feels that he cannot help acting this way toward someone he tenderly loves.
0.65	Why, then, he who does not act this way does not have love.
0.66	I will mention only one more of the properties of this love: “Love is not puffed up.”
0.67	You cannot wrong someone you love: therefore, if you love God with all your heart, you cannot wrong Him so far as to rob Him of His glory, by taking to yourself what is due to Him alone.
0.68	You will acknowledge that all you are, and all you have, is His; that without Him you can do nothing; that He is your light and your life, your strength and your all; and that you are nothing, yes, less than nothing, before Him.
0.69	And if you love your neighbor as yourself, you will not be able to prefer yourself before him.
0.70	Indeed, you will no more be able to despise anyone than to hate him.
0.71	[Indeed, you will think every man better than yourself.]
0.72	As wax melts away before the fire, so pride melts away before love.
0.73	All haughtiness, whether of heart, speech, or behavior, vanishes where love prevails.
0.74	It brings down the proud looks of him who boasted in his strength, and makes him like a little child: distrustful of himself, willing to hear, glad to learn, easily convinced, easily persuaded.
0.75	And whoever is otherwise minded, let him give up all vain hope: he is puffed up, and so does not have love.
0.76	III. It remains to inquire in what sense it can be said that “though I bestow all my goods to feed the poor, yes, though I give my body to be burned, and have not love, it profits me nothing.”
0.77	The chief sense of the words is doubtless this: that whatever we do, and whatever we suffer, if we are not renewed in the spirit of our mind by “the love of God shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit given to us,” we cannot enter into eternal life.
0.78	No one can enter there except by virtue of the covenant which God has given to man in the Son of His love.
0.79	But because general truths are less apt to affect us, let us consider one or two particulars with regard to which all we can do or suffer, if we do not have love, profits us nothing.
0.80	And, first, all this without love does not profit so as to make life happy; nor, second, so as to make death comfortable.
0.81	And first, without love nothing can profit us so as to make our lives happy.
0.82	By happiness I do not mean a slight, trifling pleasure that perhaps begins and ends in the same hour, but such a state of well-being as contents the soul and gives it a steady, lasting satisfaction.
0.83	But that nothing without love can profit us with respect to our present happiness will appear from this single consideration: you cannot lack it in any single instance without pain; and the further you depart from it, the greater the pain.
0.84	Are you lacking in longsuffering?
0.85	Then, so far as you fall short of this, you fall short of happiness.
0.86	The more the opposite dispositions — anger, irritability, revenge — prevail, the more unhappy you are.
0.87	You know it; you feel it; nor can the storm be calmed, or peace ever return to your soul, unless meekness, gentleness, patience — or, in one word, love — takes possession of it.
0.88	Does anyone find in himself ill will, malice, envy, or any other disposition opposed to kindness?
0.89	Then misery is there; and the stronger the disposition, the more miserable he is.
0.90	If the lazy man may be said to eat his own flesh, much more the malicious or envious man.
0.91	His soul is the very image of hell — full of torment as well as wickedness.
0.92	He already has the worm that never dies, and he is hastening to the fire that can never be quenched.
0.93	Only, as yet the great gulf is not fixed between him and heaven.
0.94	As yet there is a Spirit ready to help his weaknesses, who is still willing, if he stretches out his hands to heaven and laments his ignorance and misery, to purify his heart from vile affections, and to renew it in the love of God, and so lead him through present happiness up to eternal happiness.
0.95	Second: Without love, nothing can make death comfortable.
0.96	By comfortable I do not mean stupefied or senseless.
0.97	I would not say that he died comfortably who died of a stroke, or by a cannon shot, any more than he who, having his conscience seared, died as unconcerned as the beasts that perish.
0.98	Nor do I believe you would envy anyone the comfort of dying raving mad.
0.99	But by a comfortable death I mean a calm passage out of life, full of even, rational peace and joy.
0.100	And such a death all the doing and all the suffering in the world cannot give, without love.
0.101	To make this still more evident, I cannot appeal to your own experience; but I may appeal to what we have seen, and to the experience of others.
0.102	And I myself have seen two go out of this life in what I call a comfortable manner, though not with equal comfort.
0.103	One evidently had more comfort than the other, because he had more love.
0.104	I attended the first during a great part of his last trial, as well as when he yielded up his soul to God.
0.105	He cried out, “God chastens me with severe pain; but I thank Him for all; I bless Him for all; I love Him for all!”
0.106	When he was asked, not long before his release, “Are the consolations of God small to you?” he replied aloud, “No, no, no!”
0.107	Calling all who were near him by their names, he said, “Think of heaven, talk of heaven: all the time is lost when we are not thinking of heaven.”
0.108	Now this was the voice of love; and so far as that prevailed, all was comfort, peace, and joy.
0.109	But as his love was not perfect, neither was his comfort.
0.110	He had intervals of [anger or] irritability, and in them of misery; by both giving an indisputable proof that love can sweeten both life and death.
0.111	So when love is either absent from, or obscured in, the soul, there is no peace or comfort there.
0.112	It was in this place that I saw the other good soldier of Jesus Christ grappling with his last enemy, death.
0.113	And it was indeed a spectacle worthy to be seen by God, and angels, and men.
0.114	Some of his last breath was spent in a psalm of praise to Him who was then giving him the victory; in assurance of which he began to triumph even in the heat of the battle.
0.115	When he was asked, “Do you have the love of God in your heart?” he lifted up his eyes and hands, and answered, “Yes, yes!” with all the strength he had left.
0.116	To someone who asked if he was afraid of the devil, whom he had just mentioned as making his last attack on him, he replied, “No, no: my loving Savior has conquered every enemy: He is with me.
0.117	I fear nothing.” Soon after, he said, “The way to our loving Savior is sharp, but it is short.”
0.118	Nor was it long before he fell into a kind of slumber, in which his soul sweetly returned to God who gave it.
0.119	Here, we may observe, was no mixture of any passion or disposition contrary to love; therefore there was no misery, perfect love casting out whatever might have caused torment.
0.120	And whoever you are who have a like measure of love, your last end will be like his.
