0.1	“You shall not hate your brother in your heart: you shall by all means rebuke your neighbour, and not allow sin upon him.” Lev. 19:17.
0.2	A great part of the book of Exodus, and almost the whole of the book of Leviticus, relate to the ritual or ceremonial law of Moses; which was given particularly to the children of Israel, but was such “a yoke,” says the apostle Peter, “as neither our fathers nor we were able to bear.”
0.3	We are, therefore, delivered from it: and this is one branch of “the liberty with which Christ has made us free.”
0.4	Yet it is easy to observe that many excellent moral precepts are scattered among these ceremonial laws.
0.5	Several of them we find in this very chapter: such as, “You shall not gather every grape of your vineyard: you shall leave them for the poor and the stranger.
0.6	I am the Lord your God.”
0.7	(Lev. 19:10.) You shall not steal, nor lie to one another.
0.8	(Lev. 19:11.) “You shall not defraud your neighbour, nor rob him: the wages of him who is hired shall not remain with you until the morning.”
0.9	(Lev. 19:13.) “You shall not curse the deaf, nor put a stumbling block before the blind; but shall fear your God: I am the Lord.”
0.10	(Lev. 19:14.) As if He had said, I am He whose eyes are over all the earth, and whose ears are open to their cry.
0.11	“You shall do no unrighteousness in judgment: you shall not favour the person of the poor,” which compassionate men may be tempted to do; “nor honour the person of the mighty,” to which there are a thousand temptations.
0.12	(Lev. 19:15.) “You shall not go up and down as a talebearer among your people:” (Lev. 19:16:) although this is a sin which human laws have never yet been able to prevent.
0.13	Then follows, “You shall not hate your brother in your heart: you shall by all means rebuke your neighbour, and not allow sin upon him.” [Lev. 19:17]
0.14	In order to understand this important direction rightly, and to apply it profitably to our own souls, let us consider,
0.15	I. What is it that we are to rebuke or reprove?
0.16	What is the thing that is commanded here?
0.17	II. Who are they whom we are commanded to reprove? And,
0.18	III. How are we to reprove them?
0.19	I. 1. Let us consider, first, what is the duty that is commanded here?
0.20	What is it we are to rebuke or reprove?
0.21	And what is it to reprove?
0.22	What is it to reprove?
0.23	To tell anyone of his faults; as clearly appears from the following words: “You shall not allow sin upon him.”
0.24	Sin is therefore the thing we are called to reprove, or rather him who commits sin.
0.25	We are to do all that lies in our power to convince him of his fault, and lead him into the right way.
0.26	2. Love indeed requires us to warn him, not only of sin (although of this chiefly), but also of any error which, if it were persisted in, would naturally lead to sin.
0.27	If we do not “hate him in our heart,” if we love our neighbour as ourselves, this will be our constant endeavour: to warn him of every evil way, and of every mistake which tends to evil.
0.28	3. But if we do not wish to lose our labour, we should rarely reprove anyone for anything that is of a disputable nature, that will bear much to be said on both sides.
0.29	A thing may possibly appear evil to me; therefore I have scruples about doing it; and if I were to do it while that scruple remains, I would be a sinner before God.
0.30	But another is not to be judged by my conscience: to his own master he stands or falls.
0.31	Therefore I would not reprove him, except for what is clearly and undeniably evil.
0.32	Such, for instance, is profane cursing and swearing, which even those who practise it most will not often venture to defend, if one mildly remonstrates with them.
0.33	Such is drunkenness, which even a habitual drunkard will condemn when he is sober.
0.34	And such, in the judgment of most people, is the profaning of the Lord’s day.
0.35	And if any who are guilty of these sins attempt for a while to defend them, very few will persist in doing so, if you look them steadily in the face, and appeal to their own conscience in the sight of God.
0.36	II. 1. Let us, in the second place, consider: Who are those whom we are called to reprove?
0.37	It is all the more necessary to consider this, because it is affirmed by many serious persons that there are some sinners whom the Scripture itself forbids us to reprove.
0.38	This sense has been put on that solemn caution of our Lord in His Sermon on the Mount: “Do not cast your pearls before swine, lest they trample them under foot, and turn again and tear you.”
0.39	But the plain meaning of these words is: Do not offer the pearls, the sublime doctrines or mysteries of the Gospel, to those whom you know to be brutish men, immersed in sins, and having no fear of God before their eyes.
0.40	This would expose those precious jewels to contempt, and yourselves to harmful treatment.
0.41	But even those whom we know to be, in our Lord’s sense, dogs and swine, if we saw them do, or heard them speak, what they themselves know to be evil, we ought by all means to reprove them; otherwise we “hate our brother in our heart.”
0.42	2. The persons intended by “our neighbour” are every child of man, everyone who breathes the vital air, all who have souls to be saved.
0.43	And if we refrain from performing this office of love to any, because they are sinners above other men, they may persist in their iniquity, but God will require their blood at our hands.
0.44	3. How striking is Mr. Baxter’s reflection on this point, in his “Saints’ Everlasting Rest”!
0.45	“Suppose you were to meet one in the lower world, to whom you had denied this office of love when you were both together under the sun; what answer could you make to his reproaches?
0.46	‘At such a time and place, while we were under the sun, God delivered me into your hands.
0.47	I did not then know the way of salvation, but was seeking death in the error of my life; and in it you allowed me to remain, without once trying to awake me out of sleep!
0.48	Had you imparted your knowledge to me, and warned me to flee from the wrath to come, neither I nor you need ever have come into this place of torment.’”
0.49	4. Everyone, therefore, who has a soul to be saved, is entitled to this good office from you.
0.50	Yet this does not imply that it is to be done in the same degree to everyone.
0.51	It cannot be denied that there are some to whom it is particularly due.
0.52	Such, in the first place, are our parents, if we have any who stand in need of it; unless we should place our spouses and our children on an equal footing with them.
0.53	Next to these we may rank our brothers and sisters, and afterwards our relatives, as they are connected to us in a nearer or more distant manner, either by blood or by marriage.
0.54	Immediately after these are our servants, whether bound to us for a term of years or for any shorter term.
0.55	Lastly, such in their several degrees are our countrymen, our fellow citizens, and the members of the same society, whether civil or religious: the latter have a particular claim to our service, seeing these societies are formed with that very design, to watch over each other for this very end, that we may not allow sin upon our brother.
0.56	If we neglect to reprove any of these when a fair opportunity offers, we are undoubtedly to be ranked among those who “hate their brother in their heart.”
0.57	And how severe is the sentence of the Apostle against those who fall under this condemnation!
0.58	“He who hates his brother,” though it does not break out into words or actions, “is a murderer: and you know,” continues the Apostle, “that no murderer has eternal life abiding in him.”
0.59	He does not have that seed planted in his soul which grows up to everlasting life: in other words, he is in such a state that, if he dies in it, he cannot see life.
0.60	It plainly follows that to neglect this is no small thing, but greatly endangers our final salvation.
0.61	III. We have seen what is meant by reproving our brother, and who those are whom we should reprove.
0.62	But the principal thing remains to be considered.
0.63	How, in what manner, are we to reprove them?
0.64	1. It must be granted that there is considerable difficulty in performing this in a right manner: although, at the same time, it is far less difficult for some than it is for others.
0.65	There are some who are particularly qualified for it, whether by nature, or practice, or grace.
0.66	They are not encumbered either with evil shame, or with that heavy burden, the fear of man: they are both ready to undertake this labour of love, and skilful in performing it.
0.67	To these, therefore, it is little or no cross; indeed, they have a kind of relish for it, and a satisfaction in it, over and above that which arises from a consciousness of having done their duty.
0.68	But whether it is a greater or lesser cross to us, we know that to this we are called.
0.69	And however great the difficulty may be to us, we know in whom we have trusted, and that He will surely fulfil His word, “As your day, so shall your strength be.”
0.70	2. In what manner, then, shall we reprove our brother, in order that our reproof may be most effective?
0.71	Let us first of all take care that whatever we do may be done in “the spirit of love”; in the spirit of tender goodwill to our neighbour, as to one who is the son of our common Father, and one for whom Christ died, that he might be a partaker of salvation.
0.72	Then, by the grace of God, love will beget love.
0.73	The affection of the speaker will spread to the heart of the hearer; and you will find, in due time, that your labour has not been in vain in the Lord.
0.74	3. Meanwhile the greatest care must be taken that you speak in the spirit of humility.
0.75	Beware that you do not think of yourself more highly than you ought to think.
0.76	If you think too highly of yourself, you can scarcely avoid despising your brother.
0.77	And if you show, or even feel, the least contempt for those whom you reprove, it will blight your whole work, and cause you to lose all your labour.
0.78	In order to prevent the very appearance of pride, it will often be necessary to be explicit on this point; to disclaim all preferring of yourself before him; and at the very time you reprove what is evil, to acknowledge and bless God for what is good in him.
0.79	4. Great care must be taken, in the third place, to speak in the spirit of meekness as well as lowliness.
0.80	The Apostle assures us that “the wrath of men does not work the righteousness of God.”
0.81	Anger, though it be adorned with the name of zeal, begets anger; not love or holiness.
0.82	We should therefore avoid, with all possible care, the very appearance of it.
0.83	Let there be no trace of it, either in the eyes, the gestures, or the tone of voice; but let all of these unite in displaying a loving, humble, and dispassionate spirit.
0.84	5. But all this time, see that you do not trust in yourself.
0.85	Put no confidence in your own wisdom, or skill, or abilities of any kind.
0.86	For the success of all you speak or do, do not trust in yourself, but in the great Author of every good and perfect gift.
0.87	Therefore, while you are speaking, continually lift up your heart to Him who works all in all.
0.88	And whatever is spoken in the spirit of prayer will not fall to the ground.
0.89	6. So much for the spirit in which you should speak when you reprove your neighbour.
0.90	I now proceed to the outward manner.
0.91	It has frequently been found that prefacing a reproof with a frank profession of goodwill has caused what was spoken to sink deep into the heart.
0.92	This will generally have a far better effect than that grand fashionable engine—flattery—by means of which the men of the world have often done surprising things.
0.93	But the very same things, yes, far greater, have much more often been accomplished by a plain and artless declaration of disinterested love.
0.94	When you feel that God has kindled this flame in your heart, do not hide it; give it full vent!
0.95	It will pierce like lightning.
0.96	The stubborn, the hard-hearted, will melt before you, and know that God is with you in truth.
0.97	7. Although it is certain that the main point in reproving is to do it with a right spirit, yet it must also be granted that there are several little circumstances with regard to the outward manner which are by no means without their use, and therefore are not to be despised.
0.98	One of these is: whenever you reprove, do it with great seriousness; so that, as you really are in earnest, you may likewise appear to be so.
0.99	A joking reproof makes little impression, and is soon forgotten; besides, it is often taken badly, as if you were ridiculing the person you reprove.
0.100	And indeed those who are not accustomed to making jests do not take it well to be jested about.
0.101	One means of giving a serious air to what you say is, as often as possible, to use the very words of Scripture.
0.102	We frequently find that the word of God, even in a private conversation, has a peculiar energy; and the sinner, when he least expects it, feels it “sharper than a two-edged sword.”
0.103	8. Yet there are some exceptions to this general rule of reproving seriously.
0.104	There are some exceptional cases in which, as a good judge of human nature observes,
0.105	Ridiculum acri fortius—
0.106	a little well-placed raillery will pierce deeper than solid argument.
0.107	But this applies chiefly when we have to do with those who are strangers to religion.
0.108	And when we condescend to give a playful reproof to a person of this character, it seems we are authorized to do so by that advice of Solomon, “Answer a fool according to his folly, lest he be wise in his own eyes.”
0.109	9. The manner of the reproof may, in other respects too, be varied according to the occasion.
0.110	Sometimes you may find it proper to use many words, to express your meaning at length.
0.111	At other times you may judge it more expedient to use few words, perhaps a single sentence; and at others it may be advisable to use no words at all, but a gesture, a sigh, or a look, particularly when the person you would reprove is greatly your superior.
0.112	And frequently this silent kind of reproof will be accompanied by the power of God, and consequently have a far better effect than a long and laboured discourse.
0.113	10. Once more: remember the remark of Solomon, “A word spoken in season, how good it is!”
0.114	It is true, if you are providentially called to reprove anyone whom you are not likely to see any more, you are to seize the present opportunity, and to speak “in season” or “out of season”; but with those whom you have frequent opportunities of seeing, you may wait for a fair occasion.
0.115	Here the advice of the poet applies.
0.116	You may speak
0.117	Si validus, si laetus erit, si denique poscet:
0.118	when he is in a good humour, or when he asks it of you.
0.119	Here you may catch the
0.120	Mollia tempora fandi,—
0.121	time when his mind is in a soft, mild frame: and then God will both teach you how to speak, and give a blessing to what is spoken.
0.122	11. But here let me guard you against one mistake.
0.123	It passes for an indisputable maxim, “Never attempt to reprove a man when he is intoxicated with drink.”
0.124	Reproof, it is said, is then thrown away, and can have no good effect.
0.125	I dare not say so.
0.126	I have seen not a few clear instances of the contrary.
0.127	Take one: many years ago, passing by a man in Moorfields who was so drunk he could hardly stand, I put a paper into his hand.
0.128	He looked at it, and said, “A Word—A Word to a Drunkard—that is me—Sir, Sir!
0.129	I am wrong—I know I am wrong—please let me talk a little with you.”
0.130	He held me by the hand a full half-hour: and I believe he got drunk no more.
0.131	12. I beseech you, brethren, by the mercies of God, do not despise poor drunkards!
0.132	Have compassion on them!
0.133	Be urgent with them in season and out of season!
0.134	Do not let shame, or fear of men, prevent your pulling these brands out of the burning: many of them are self-condemned:
0.135	Nor do they fail to see the evil plight / That they are in;
0.136	but they despair; they have no hope of escaping out of it; and they sink into it still deeper, because no one else has any hope for them!
0.137	“Sinners of every other sort,” said a venerable old clergyman, “I have frequently known converted to God.
0.138	But a habitual drunkard I have never known converted.”
0.139	But I have known five hundred, perhaps five thousand.
0.140	Ho! Are you one who reads these words?
0.141	Then hear the words of the Lord!
0.142	I have a message from God to you, O sinner!
0.143	Thus says the Lord: Do not cast away your hope.
0.144	I have not forgotten you.
0.145	He who tells you there is no help is a liar from the beginning.
0.146	Look up! Behold the Lamb of God, who takes away the sin of the world!
0.147	This day salvation has come to your soul: only see that you do not despise Him who speaks!
0.148	Just now He says to you: “Son, be of good cheer!
0.149	Your sins are forgiven you!”
0.150	13. Lastly: you who are diligent in this labour of love, see that you are not discouraged, even if, after you have used your best endeavours, you should see no present fruit.
0.151	You have need of patience, and then, “after you have done the will of God” in this, the harvest will come.
0.152	Never be “weary of well-doing; in due time you shall reap, if you do not faint.”
0.153	Follow the example of Abraham, who “against hope, still believed in hope.”
0.154	“Cast your bread upon the waters; for you shall find it after many days.”
0.155	14. I have now only a few words to add to you, my brethren, who are commonly called “Methodists.”
0.156	I never heard or read of any considerable revival of religion which was not accompanied by a spirit of reproving.
0.157	I believe it cannot be otherwise; for what is faith, unless it works by love?
0.158	So it was in every part of England when the present revival of religion began about fifty years ago: all the subjects of that revival—all the Methodists, so called, in every place—were reprovers of outward sin.
0.159	And indeed so are all who, “being justified by faith, have peace with God through Jesus Christ.”
0.160	Such they are at first; and if they use that precious gift, it will never be taken away.
0.161	Come, brethren, in the name of God, let us begin again!
0.162	Rich or poor, let us all arise as one man; and by all means let every man “rebuke his neighbour, and not allow sin upon him!”
0.163	Then all Great Britain and Ireland shall know that we do not “go to war at our own cost”: yes, “God shall bless us, and all the ends of the world shall fear Him.”
0.164	Manchester, July 28, 1787
