0.1	“You almost persuade me to be a Christian.” Acts 26:28.
0.2	And there are many who go this far: ever since the Christian religion has been in the world, there have been many in every age and nation who were almost persuaded to be Christians.
0.3	But seeing that it avails nothing before God to go only this far, it greatly concerns us to consider,
0.4	First, what is implied in being almost,
0.5	Secondly, what is implied in being altogether, a Christian.
0.6	I. (I.) 1. Now, being almost a Christian implies, first, heathen honesty.
0.7	No one, I suppose, will question this; especially since by heathen honesty here I mean not only that which is recommended in the writings of their philosophers, but such as the common heathen expected of one another, and many of them actually practised.
0.8	By its rules they were taught that they ought not to be unjust; not to take away their neighbour’s goods, either by robbery or theft; not to oppress the poor, nor to use extortion toward anyone; not to cheat or overreach either the poor or the rich, in whatever dealings they had with them; to defraud no one of his right; and, if it were possible, to owe no one anything.
0.9	2. Again, the common heathen allowed that some regard was to be paid to truth, as well as to justice.
0.10	And accordingly they held in abomination not only him who perjured himself, who called God to witness to a lie, but also him who was known to be a slanderer of his neighbour, who falsely accused anyone.
0.11	And indeed, they thought little better of deliberate liars of any sort, regarding them as the disgrace of humankind and the pests of society.
0.12	3. Yet again, there was a kind of love and assistance which they expected from one another.
0.13	They expected whatever assistance anyone could give another without harm to himself.
0.14	And this they extended not only to those little offices of humanity which are performed without any expense or labour, but also to feeding the hungry, if they had food to spare; clothing the naked with their own surplus clothing; and, in general, giving to anyone in need such things as they did not need themselves.
0.15	This far, by the lowest account of it, heathen honesty went; the first thing implied in being almost a Christian.
0.16	(II.) 4. A second thing implied in being almost a Christian is having a form of godliness—of that godliness which is prescribed in the gospel of Christ; having the outside of a real Christian.
0.17	Accordingly, the almost Christian does nothing which the gospel forbids. He does not take the name of God in vain; he blesses and does not curse; he does not swear at all, but his speech is, Yes, yes; No, no. He does not profane the Lord’s Day, nor allow it to be profaned, even by the stranger who is within his gates. He not only avoids all actual adultery, fornication, and uncleanness, but every word or look that either directly or indirectly tends toward them; yes, and all idle words, abstaining from detraction, backbiting, talebearing, and evil speaking, and from “all foolish talking and jesting”—eutrapelia, a kind of virtue in the heathen moralist’s account—in short, from all conversation that is not “good for the purpose of edifying,” and that consequently “grieves the Holy Spirit of God, by whom we are sealed to the day of redemption.”
0.18	5. He abstains from “wine in which is excess”; from revelries and gluttony.
0.19	He avoids, as far as lies in him, all strife and contention, continually endeavouring to live peaceably with all men.
0.20	And if he suffers wrong, he does not avenge himself, nor return evil for evil. He is no reviler, no brawler, no scoffer, either at the faults or the weaknesses of his neighbour. He does not willingly wrong, hurt, or grieve anyone; but in all things acts and speaks by that plain rule, “Whatever you would not have him do to you, do not do to another.”
0.21	6. And in doing good, he does not confine himself to cheap and easy acts of kindness, but labours and suffers for the benefit of many, that by all means he may help some.
0.22	In spite of toil or pain, “whatever his hand finds to do, he does it with his might,” whether it is for his friends or for his enemies, for the evil or for the good.
0.23	For being “not slothful” in this, or in any “business,” as he “has opportunity” he does “good,” all kinds of good, “to all men,” and to their souls as well as their bodies. He reproves the wicked, instructs the ignorant, confirms the wavering, enlivens the good, and comforts the afflicted. He labours to awaken those who sleep; to lead those whom God has already awakened to the “Fountain opened for sin and for uncleanness,” that they may wash in it and be clean; and to stir up those who are saved through faith to adorn the gospel of Christ in all things.
0.24	7. He who has the form of godliness also uses the means of grace; yes, all of them, and at every opportunity. He constantly attends the house of God; and that not as some are in the habit of doing, who come into the presence of the Most High either loaded with gold and costly clothing, or in all the gaudy vanity of dress, and who, either by their untimely civilities to one another or the unfitting levity of their behaviour, disclaim all pretensions to the form as well as to the power of godliness.
0.25	Would to God there were none even among ourselves who fall under the same condemnation! who come into this house, perhaps, gazing about, or with all the signs of the most listless, careless indifference, though sometimes they may seem to use a prayer to God for his blessing on what they are entering upon; who, during that awe-inspiring service, are either asleep, or reclining in the most convenient posture for it; or, as though they supposed God was asleep, are talking with one another, or looking around, as if utterly without anything to do.
0.26	Nor let these be accused of having the form of godliness.
0.27	No; he who has even this behaves with seriousness and attention in every part of that solemn service.
0.28	More especially, when he approaches the table of the Lord, it is not with light or careless behaviour, but with an air, gesture, and bearing which speaks nothing else but “God be merciful to me a sinner!”
0.29	8. If we add to this the constant use of family prayer by those who are heads of households, and the setting apart of times for private addresses to God, with a daily seriousness of behaviour—he who uniformly practises this outward religion has the form of godliness.
0.30	Only one thing more is needed for him to be almost a Christian, and that is sincerity.
0.31	(III.) 9. By sincerity I mean a real, inward principle of religion, from which these outward actions flow.
0.32	And indeed, if we do not have this, we do not have heathen honesty; no, not even so much of it as will satisfy the demand of a heathen Epicurean poet.
0.33	Even this poor wretch, in his sober intervals, is able to testify,
0.34	Oderunt peccare boni, virtutis amore; / Oderunt peccare mali, formidine poenae.
0.35	[Good men avoid sin out of love of virtue; / Wicked men avoid sin out of fear of punishment.]
0.36	So that if a man only abstains from doing evil in order to avoid punishment, Non pasces in cruce corvos [You will not be hanged], says the pagan; there, “you have your reward.”
0.37	But even he will not allow such a harmless man as this to be so much as a good heathen.
0.38	If, then, any man, from the same motive—that is, to avoid punishment, to avoid the loss of his friends, or his gain, or his reputation—should not only abstain from doing evil, but also do ever so much good, yes, and use all the means of grace, yet we could not with any propriety say that this man is even almost a Christian.
0.39	If he has no better principle in his heart, he is only a hypocrite altogether.
0.40	10. Sincerity, therefore, is necessarily implied in being almost a Christian: a real design to serve God, a heartfelt desire to do his will.
0.41	It is necessarily implied that a man has a sincere aim of pleasing God in all things; in all his conduct; in all his actions; in all he does or leaves undone.
0.42	This design, if any man is almost a Christian, runs through the whole course of his life.
0.43	This is the moving principle, both in his doing good, his abstaining from evil, and his using the ordinances of God.
0.44	11. But here it will probably be asked, “Is it possible that any man living should go as far as this and nevertheless be only almost a Christian?”
0.45	What more than this can be implied in being a Christian altogether?
0.46	I answer, first, that it is possible to go this far and yet be only almost a Christian, I learn not only from the oracles of God, but also from the sure testimony of experience.
0.47	12. Brethren, great is “my boldness toward you in this matter.”
0.48	And “forgive me this wrong” if I declare my own folly on the housetop, for your sake and the gospel’s. Allow me, then, to speak freely of myself, just as of another man.
0.49	I am content to be humbled, so that you may be exalted, and to be yet more lowly for the glory of my Lord.
0.50	13. I did go this far for many years, as many in this place can testify: using diligence to shun all evil and to have a conscience without offence; redeeming the time; buying up every opportunity of doing all good to all men; constantly and carefully using all the public and all the private means of grace; endeavouring after a steady seriousness of behaviour at all times and in all places; and—God is my witness, before whom I stand—doing all this in sincerity; having a real design to serve God, a heartfelt desire to do his will in all things, to please him who had called me to “fight the good fight” and to “lay hold of eternal life.”
0.51	Yet my own conscience bears me witness in the Holy Spirit that all this time I was only almost a Christian.
0.52	II. If it is asked, “What more than this is implied in being altogether a Christian?” I answer,
0.53	(I.) 1. First, the love of God.
0.54	For thus says his word, “You shall love the Lord your God with all your heart, and with all your soul, and with all your mind, and with all your strength.”
0.55	Such a love is this as engrosses the whole heart, as takes up all the affections, as fills the entire capacity of the soul and employs the utmost extent of all its faculties. The spirit of him who thus loves the Lord his God continually “rejoices in God his Saviour.” His delight is in the Lord, his Lord and his All, to whom “in everything he gives thanks.
0.56	All his desire is to God, and to the remembrance of his name.” His heart is ever crying out, “Whom have I in heaven but You? And there is none upon earth that I desire besides You.”
0.57	Indeed, what can he desire besides God?
0.58	Not the world, or the things of the world: for he is “crucified to the world, and the world crucified to him.” He is crucified to “the desire of the flesh, the desire of the eye, and the pride of life.”
0.59	Yes, he is dead to pride of every kind: for “love is not puffed up,” but he who, “dwelling in love, dwells in God, and God in him,” is less than nothing in his own eyes.
0.60	(II.) 2. The second thing implied in being altogether a Christian is the love of our neighbour.
0.61	For thus said our Lord in the following words: “You shall love your neighbour as yourself.” If any man asks, “Who is my neighbour?” we reply: every man in the world; every child of him who is the Father of the spirits of all flesh.
0.62	Nor may we in any way except our enemies, or the enemies of God and of their own souls.
0.63	But every Christian loves these also as himself, yes, “as Christ loved us.” He who would more fully understand what kind of love this is may consider St. Paul’s description of it.
0.64	It is “long-suffering and kind.”
0.65	It “does not envy.” It is not rash or hasty in judging.
0.66	It “is not puffed up,” but makes him who loves, the least, the servant of all.
0.67	Love “does not behave itself improperly,” but becomes “all things to all men.”
0.68	She “does not seek her own,” but only the good of others, that they may be saved.
0.69	“Love is not provoked.”
0.70	It casts out wrath, which whoever has is lacking in love.
0.71	“It thinks no evil.
0.72	It does not rejoice in iniquity, but rejoices in the truth.
0.73	It covers all things, believes all things, hopes all things, endures all things.”
0.74	(III.) 3. There is yet one thing more that may be considered separately, though it cannot actually be separated from the preceding, which is implied in being altogether a Christian; and that is the ground of all, namely faith.
0.75	Very excellent things are spoken of this throughout the oracles of God.
0.76	“Everyone,” says the beloved disciple, “who believes is born of God.”
0.77	“To as many as received him, he gave power to become the sons of God, even to those who believe on his name.”
0.78	And “this is the victory that overcomes the world, even our faith.”
0.79	Yes, our Lord himself declares, “He who believes in the Son has everlasting life; and does not come into condemnation, but has passed from death to life.”
0.80	4. But here let no man deceive his own soul.
0.81	“It is diligently to be noted that the faith which does not bring forth repentance, and love, and all good works, is not that right, living faith, but a dead and devilish one.
0.82	For even the devils believe that Christ was born of a virgin; that he worked all kinds of miracles, declaring himself very God; that for our sakes he suffered a most painful death, to redeem us from everlasting death; that he rose again the third day; that he ascended into heaven, and sits at the right hand of the Father, and at the end of the world will come again to judge both the living and the dead.
0.83	These articles of our faith the devils believe, and so they believe all that is written in the Old and New Testament.
0.84	And yet for all this faith, they are but devils.
0.85	They remain still in their damnable state, lacking the very true Christian faith.”
0.86	[Homily on the Salvation of Man.]
0.87	5. “The right and true Christian faith is” (to continue in the words of our own Church) “not only to believe that Holy Scripture and the Articles of our Faith are true, but also to have a sure trust and confidence to be saved from everlasting damnation by Christ.
0.88	It is a sure trust and confidence which a man has in God, that by the merits of Christ his sins are forgiven, and he is reconciled to the favour of God; from which follows a loving heart, to obey his commandments.”
0.89	6. Now, whoever has this faith, which “purifies the heart” (by the power of God, who dwells in it) from “pride, anger, desire, from all unrighteousness,” from “all filthiness of flesh and spirit”; which fills it with love stronger than death, both to God and to all mankind—love that does the works of God, glorying to spend and be spent for all men, and that endures with joy not only the reproach of Christ, being mocked, despised, and hated by all men, but whatever the wisdom of God permits the malice of men or devils to inflict—whoever has this faith, thus working by love, is not almost only, but altogether, a Christian.
0.90	7. But who are the living witnesses of these things?
0.91	I beseech you, brethren, as in the presence of that God before whom “hell and destruction are without a covering—how much more the hearts of the children of men?”—that each of you would ask his own heart, “Am I of that number?
0.92	Do I practise justice, mercy, and truth even as far as the rules of heathen honesty require?
0.93	If so, do I have even the outside of a Christian? the form of godliness?
0.94	Do I abstain from evil—from whatever is forbidden in the written Word of God?
0.95	Do I, whatever good my hand finds to do, do it with my might?
0.96	Do I seriously use all the ordinances of God at every opportunity?
0.97	And is all this done with a sincere design and desire to please God in all things?”
0.98	8. Are not many of you conscious that you never came this far; that you have not been even almost a Christian; that you have not come up to the standard of heathen honesty; at least, not to the form of Christian godliness?—much less has God seen sincerity in you, a real design of pleasing him in all things.
0.99	You never so much as intended to devote all your words and works, your business, studies, and diversions, to his glory.
0.100	You never even designed or desired that whatever you did should be done “in the name of the Lord Jesus,” and as such should be “a spiritual sacrifice, acceptable to God through Christ.”
0.101	9. But supposing you had, do good designs and good desires make a Christian?
0.102	By no means, unless they are brought to good effect.
0.103	“Hell is paved,” says one, “with good intentions.”
0.104	The great question of all, then, still remains.
0.105	Is the love of God shed abroad in your heart?
0.106	Can you cry out, “My God, and my All”?
0.107	Do you desire nothing but him?
0.108	Are you happy in God?
0.109	Is he your glory, your delight, your crown of rejoicing?
0.110	And is this commandment written in your heart, “That he who loves God love his brother also”?
0.111	Do you, then, love your neighbour as yourself?
0.112	Do you love every man, even your enemies, even the enemies of God, as your own soul? as Christ loved you?
0.113	Yes, do you believe that Christ loved you, and gave himself for you?
0.114	Do you have faith in his blood?
0.115	Do you believe the Lamb of God has taken away your sins, and cast them as a stone into the depth of the sea? that he has blotted out the handwriting that was against you, taking it out of the way, nailing it to his cross?
0.116	Do you indeed have redemption through his blood, even the remission of your sins?
0.117	And does his Spirit bear witness with your spirit that you are a child of God?
0.118	10. The God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who now stands in the midst of us, knows that if any man dies without this faith and this love, it would be good for him if he had never been born.
0.119	Awake, then, you who sleep, and call upon your God: call in the day when he may be found.
0.120	Do not let him rest until he makes his “goodness pass before you”; until he proclaims to you the name of the Lord: “The Lord, the Lord God, merciful and gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in goodness and truth, keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity and transgression and sin.”
0.121	Let no man persuade you by empty words to rest short of this prize of your high calling.
0.122	But cry day and night to him who, “while we were without strength, died for the ungodly,” until you know in whom you have believed, and can say, “My Lord and my God!”
0.123	Remember “always to pray, and not to grow faint,” until you also can lift up your hand to heaven and declare to him who lives forever and ever, “Lord, You know all things; You know that I love You.”
0.124	11. May we all thus experience what it is to be not almost only, but altogether Christians; being justified freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in Jesus; knowing that we have peace with God through Jesus Christ; rejoicing in hope of the glory of God; and having the love of God shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit given to us!
