0.1	“To him who does not work, but believes on him who justifies the ungodly, his faith is counted for righteousness.” Romans 4:5.
0.2	1. How a sinner may be justified before God, the Lord and Judge of all, is a question of no ordinary importance to every child of man.
0.3	It contains the foundation of all our hope, since as long as we are at enmity with God there can be no true peace, no solid joy, either in time or in eternity.
0.4	What peace can there be while our own heart condemns us; and much more, he who is “greater than our heart, and knows all things”?
0.5	What solid joy, either in this world or in the world to come, while “the wrath of God abides on us”?
0.6	2. And yet how little this important question has been understood!
0.7	What confused notions many have had concerning it!
0.8	Indeed, not only confused, but often utterly false; as contrary to the truth as light is to darkness; notions absolutely inconsistent with the oracles of God and with the whole analogy of faith.
0.9	And so, erring concerning the very foundation, they could not possibly build on it; at least, not “gold, silver, or precious stones,” which would endure when tested as by fire, but only “hay and stubble,” neither acceptable to God nor profitable to man.
0.10	3. In order to do justice, as far as lies in me, to the vast importance of the subject; to save those who seek the truth in sincerity from “idle talk and strife about words”; to clear up the confusion of thought into which so many have already been led by it; and to give them true and just conceptions of this great mystery of godliness, I shall endeavor to show:
0.11	First, what is the general ground of this whole doctrine of justification.
0.12	Secondly, what justification is.
0.13	Thirdly, who they are that are justified. And,
0.14	Fourthly, on what terms they are justified.
0.15	I. I am, first, to show what is the general ground of this whole doctrine of justification.
0.16	1. In the image of God man was made: holy as he who created him is holy; merciful as the Author of all is merciful; perfect as his Father in heaven is perfect.
0.17	As God is love, so man, dwelling in love, dwelt in God, and God in him.
0.18	God made him to be an “image of his own eternity,” an incorruptible picture of the God of glory.
0.19	He was accordingly pure, as God is pure, from every spot of sin.
0.20	He knew no evil of any kind or degree, but was inwardly and outwardly sinless and undefiled.
0.21	He “loved the Lord his God with all his heart, and with all his mind, and soul, and strength.”
0.22	2. To man, thus upright and perfect, God gave a perfect law, to which he required full and perfect obedience.
0.23	He required full obedience in every point, and this to be performed without any interruption, from the moment man became a living soul until the time of his trial should be ended.
0.24	No allowance was made for any falling short; as, indeed, there was no need of any, man being altogether equal to the task assigned and thoroughly equipped for every good word and work.
0.25	3. To the entire law of love which was written in his heart (against which, perhaps, he could not sin directly), it seemed good to the sovereign wisdom of God to add one positive law: “You shall not eat of the fruit of the tree that grows in the midst of the garden,” attaching this penalty to it: “In the day that you eat of it you shall surely die.”
0.26	4. Such, then, was the state of man in Paradise.
0.27	By the free, unmerited love of God, he was holy and happy: he knew, loved, and enjoyed God, which is, in substance, life everlasting.
0.28	And in this life of love he was to continue forever, if he continued to obey God in all things; but if he disobeyed him in any, he was to forfeit all.
0.29	“In that day,” said God, “you shall surely die.”
0.30	5. Man did disobey God.
0.31	He “ate of the tree, of which God commanded him, saying, You shall not eat of it.”
0.32	And in that day he was condemned by the righteous judgment of God.
0.33	Then also the sentence of which he had been warned before began to take effect upon him.
0.34	For the moment he tasted that fruit, he died.
0.35	His soul died, was separated from God; and separated from him, the soul has no more life than the body has when separated from the soul.
0.36	His body, likewise, became corruptible and mortal, so that death then took hold of this also.
0.37	And being already dead in spirit, dead to God, dead in sin, he hastened on to everlasting death, to the destruction of both body and soul in the fire never to be quenched.
0.38	6. Thus “by one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin.
0.39	And so death passed upon all men,” as being contained in him who was the common father and representative of us all.
0.40	Thus, “through the offense of one,” all are dead: dead to God, dead in sin, dwelling in a corruptible, mortal body, soon to be dissolved, and under the sentence of eternal death.
0.41	For as “by one man’s disobedience” all “were made sinners,” so by that offense of one “judgment came upon all men to condemnation.”
0.42	(Romans 5:12)
0.43	7. In this state we were, even all mankind, when “God so loved the world that he gave his only begotten Son, to the end that we might not perish, but have everlasting life.”
0.44	In the fullness of time he was made Man, another common Head of mankind, a second general Parent and Representative of the whole human race.
0.45	And it was as such that “he bore our griefs,” “the Lord laying on him the iniquities of us all.”
0.46	Then he was “wounded for our transgressions, and bruised for our iniquities.”
0.47	“He made his soul an offering for sin”; he poured out his blood for the transgressors; he “bore our sins in his own body on the tree,” that by his stripes we might be healed; and by that one offering of himself, once offered, he has redeemed me and all mankind, having thereby “made a full, perfect, and sufficient sacrifice and satisfaction for the sins of the whole world.”
0.48	8. In consideration of this, that the Son of God has “tasted death for every man,” God has now “reconciled the world to himself, not imputing to them their” former “trespasses.”
0.49	And thus, “as by the offense of one judgment came upon all men to condemnation, even so by the righteousness of one the free gift came upon all men to justification.”
0.50	So that, for the sake of his well-beloved Son, of what he has done and suffered for us, God now grants, on one condition only (which he himself also enables us to fulfill), both to remit the punishment due to our sins, to reinstate us in his favor, and to restore our dead souls to spiritual life, as the pledge of eternal life.
0.51	9. This, therefore, is the general ground of the whole doctrine of justification.
0.52	By the sin of the first Adam, who was not only the father but also the representative of us all, we all fell short of the favor of God; we all became children of wrath; or, as the Apostle expresses it, “judgment came upon all men to condemnation.”
0.53	Even so, by the sacrifice for sin made by the Second Adam, as the Representative of us all, God is so far reconciled to all the world that he has given them a new covenant; and once its plain condition is fulfilled, “there is no more condemnation” for us, but “we are justified freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in Jesus Christ.”
0.54	II. 1. But what is it to be “justified”?
0.55	What is “justification”? This was the second thing which I proposed to show.
0.56	And it is evident, from what has already been observed, that it is not being made actually just and righteous.
0.57	This is “sanctification,” which is indeed, in some degree, the immediate fruit of justification, but nevertheless is a distinct gift of God, and of a totally different nature.
0.58	The one implies what God does for us through his Son; the other, what he works in us by his Spirit.
0.59	So that, although some rare instances may be found in which the term “justified” or “justification” is used in so wide a sense as to include “sanctification” also, yet in general use they are sufficiently distinguished from each other, both by St. Paul and by the other inspired writers.
0.60	2. Nor is that far-fetched notion, that justification is the clearing of us from accusation, particularly that of Satan, easily provable from any clear text of Holy Scripture.
0.61	In the whole scriptural account of this matter, as laid down above, neither that accuser nor his accusation appears to be taken into account at all.
0.62	It cannot indeed be denied that he is the “accuser” of men, emphatically so called.
0.63	But it in no way appears that the great Apostle has any reference to this, more or less, in all he has written concerning justification, either to the Romans or to the Galatians.
0.64	3. It is also far easier to take for granted than to prove from any clear testimony of Scripture that justification is the clearing of us from the accusation brought against us by the law; at least, if this forced, unnatural way of speaking means either more or less than this: that, whereas we have transgressed the law of God and thereby deserved the damnation of hell, God does not inflict on those who are justified the punishment which they had deserved.
0.65	4. Least of all does justification imply that God is deceived in those whom he justifies; that he thinks them to be what, in fact, they are not; that he accounts them to be otherwise than they are.
0.66	It by no means implies that God judges concerning us contrary to the real nature of things; that he esteems us better than we really are, or believes us righteous when we are unrighteous.
0.67	Surely not. The judgment of the all-wise God is always according to truth.
0.68	Nor can it ever be consistent with his unerring wisdom to think that I am innocent, to judge that I am righteous or holy, because another is so.
0.69	He can no more confuse me in this way with Christ than with David or Abraham.
0.70	Let any man to whom God has given understanding weigh this without prejudice, and he cannot but perceive that such a notion of justification is reconcilable neither to reason nor to Scripture.
0.71	5. The plain scriptural notion of justification is pardon, the forgiveness of sins.
0.72	It is that act of God the Father whereby, for the sake of the propitiation made by the blood of his Son, he “shows forth his righteousness (or mercy) by the remission of the sins that are past.”
0.73	This is the easy, natural account of it given by St. Paul throughout this whole epistle.
0.74	So he explains it himself, more particularly in this and in the following chapter.
0.75	Thus, in the next verses but one after the text, “Blessed are they,” he says, “whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered; blessed is the man to whom the Lord will not impute sin.”
0.76	To him who is justified or forgiven, God “will not impute sin” to his condemnation.
0.77	He will not condemn him on that account, either in this world or in the world to come.
0.78	His sins, all his past sins, in thought, word, and deed, are covered, are blotted out; they shall not be remembered or mentioned against him, any more than if they had never been.
0.79	God will not inflict on that sinner what he deserved to suffer, because the Son of his love has suffered for him.
0.80	And from the time we are “accepted through the Beloved,” “reconciled to God through his blood,” he loves and blesses and watches over us for good, even as if we had never sinned.
0.81	Indeed, the Apostle in one place seems to extend the meaning of the word much further, where he says, “Not the hearers of the law, but the doers of the law, shall be justified.”
0.82	Here he appears to refer our justification to the sentence of the great day.
0.83	And so our Lord himself unquestionably does, when he says, “By your words you shall be justified,” proving by this that “for every idle word men speak, they shall give an account in the day of judgment.”
0.84	But perhaps we can hardly produce another instance of St. Paul using the word in that distant sense.
0.85	In the general tenor of his writings it is evident that he does not; and least of all in the text before us, which undeniably speaks, not of those who have already “finished their course,” but of those who are now just “setting out,” just beginning to “run the race that is set before them.”
0.86	III. 1. But this is the third thing which was to be considered, namely, who are they that are justified?
0.87	And the Apostle tells us expressly: the ungodly. “He (that is, God) justifies the ungodly”; the ungodly of every kind and degree, and none but the ungodly.
0.88	As “those who are righteous need no repentance,” so they need no forgiveness.
0.89	It is only sinners who have any occasion for pardon; it is sin alone which admits of being forgiven.
0.90	Forgiveness, therefore, has an immediate reference to sin, and, in this respect, to nothing else.
0.91	It is our “unrighteousness” to which the pardoning God is “merciful”; it is our “iniquity” which he “remembers no more.”
0.92	2. This seems not to be considered at all by those who so vehemently contend that a man must be sanctified, that is, holy, before he can be justified; especially by those of them who affirm that universal holiness or obedience must precede justification.
0.93	(Unless they mean that justification at the last day, which is wholly outside the present question.)
0.94	So far from it, that the very supposition is not only flatly impossible (for where there is no love of God, there is no holiness, and there is no love of God except from a sense of his loving us), but also grossly, intrinsically absurd, contradictory to itself.
0.95	For it is not a saint but a sinner who is forgiven, and forgiven as a sinner.
0.96	God justifies not the godly, but the ungodly; not those who are already holy, but the unholy.
0.97	On what condition he does this will be considered shortly; but whatever it is, it cannot be holiness.
0.98	To assert this is to say that the Lamb of God takes away only those sins which were taken away before.
0.99	3. Does the good Shepherd, then, seek and save only those who are found already?
0.100	No: he seeks and saves that which is lost.
0.101	He pardons those who need his pardoning mercy.
0.102	He saves from the guilt of sin (and, at the same time, from its power) sinners of every kind, of every degree: men who until then were altogether ungodly; in whom the love of the Father was not; and, consequently, in whom dwelt no good thing, no good or truly Christian disposition — but all such as were evil and abominable — pride, anger, love of the world — the genuine fruits of that “carnal mind” which is “enmity against God.”
0.103	4. Those who are sick, the burden of whose sins is intolerable, are they who need a Physician; those who are guilty, who groan under the wrath of God, are they who need a pardon.
0.104	Those who are “condemned already,” not only by God but also by their own conscience, as by a thousand witnesses, of all their ungodliness, both in thought and word and work, cry aloud for him who “justifies the ungodly,” through the redemption that is in Jesus — the ungodly, and “him who does not work”; who does not work, before he is justified, anything that is good, that is truly virtuous or holy, but only evil continually.
0.105	For his heart is necessarily, essentially evil, until the love of God is poured out in it.
0.106	And while the tree is corrupt, so are the fruits; “for an evil tree cannot bring forth good fruit.”
0.107	5. If it is objected, “No, but a man, before he is justified, may feed the hungry or clothe the naked; and these are good works,” the answer is easy: he may do these, even before he is justified; and these are, in one sense, “good works”; they are “good and profitable to men.”
0.108	But it does not follow that they are, strictly speaking, good in themselves, or good in the sight of God.
0.109	All truly “good works” (to use the words of our Church) “follow after justification”; and they are therefore good and “acceptable to God in Christ,” because they “spring out of a true and living faith.”
0.110	By the same reasoning, all “works done before justification are not good,” in the Christian sense, “since they do not spring from faith in Jesus Christ” (though they may spring from some kind of faith in God); “yes, rather, because they are not done as God has willed and commanded them to be done, we do not doubt” (however strange it may appear to some) “that they have the nature of sin.”
0.111	6. Perhaps those who doubt this have not duly considered the weighty reason which is given here, why no works done before justification can be truly and properly good.
0.112	The argument plainly runs thus:
0.113	No works are good which are not done as God has willed and commanded them to be done.
0.114	But no works done before justification are done as God has willed and commanded them to be done:
0.115	Therefore, no works done before justification are good.
0.116	The first proposition is self-evident; and the second, that no works done before justification are done as God has willed and commanded them to be done, will appear equally plain and undeniable if we only consider that God has willed and commanded that “all our works” should “be done in charity” (en agape), in love, in that love to God which produces love to all mankind.
0.117	But none of our works can be done in this love while the love of the Father (of God as our Father) is not in us; and this love cannot be in us until we receive the Spirit of Adoption, crying in our hearts, Abba, Father.
0.118	If, therefore, God does not justify the ungodly, and him who (in this sense) does not work, then Christ has died in vain; then, notwithstanding his death, no flesh living can be justified.
0.119	IV. 1. But on what terms, then, is he justified who is altogether “ungodly,” and until that time “does not work”? On one alone, which is faith: he “believes on him who justifies the ungodly.”
0.120	And “he who believes is not condemned”; yes, he has “passed from death to life.”
0.121	“For the righteousness (or mercy) of God is by faith of Jesus Christ to all and upon all those who believe: whom God has set forth as a propitiation, through faith in his blood; that he might be just, and” (consistently with his justice) “the Justifier of him who believes in Jesus.” “Therefore we conclude that a man is justified by faith without the deeds of the law”; without previous obedience to the moral law, which, indeed, he could not until now perform.
0.122	That it is the moral law, and that alone, which is intended here appears evidently from the words that follow: “Do we then make void the law through faith?
0.123	God forbid! Yes, we establish the law.
0.124	What law do we establish by faith?
0.125	Not the ritual law; not the ceremonial law of Moses.
0.126	In no way; but the great, unchangeable law of love, the holy love of God and of our neighbor.”
0.127	2. Faith in general is a divine, supernatural “elegchos,” “evidence” or “conviction,” “of things not seen,” not discoverable by our bodily senses, as being either past, future, or spiritual.
0.128	Justifying faith implies not only a divine evidence or conviction that “God was in Christ, reconciling the world to himself,” but a sure trust and confidence that Christ died for “my” sins, that he loved “me,” and gave himself for “me.”
0.129	And whenever a sinner believes in this way, be it in early childhood, in the strength of his years, or when he is old and gray-haired, God justifies that ungodly one: God, for the sake of his Son, pardons and absolves him who until then had no good thing in him.
0.130	Repentance, indeed, God had given him before; but that repentance was neither more nor less than a deep sense of the lack of all good and the presence of all evil.
0.131	And whatever good he has or does from the hour when he first believes in God through Christ, faith does not “find” but “brings.”
0.132	This is the fruit of faith.
0.133	First the tree is good, and then the fruit is good also.
0.134	3. I cannot describe the nature of this faith better than in the words of our own Church: “The only instrument of salvation” (of which justification is one branch) “is faith; that is, a sure trust and confidence that God both has forgiven and will forgive our sins, that he has accepted us again into his favor, for the merits of Christ’s death and passion. — But here we must take heed that we do not falter with God through an inconstant, wavering faith: Peter, coming to Christ upon the water, because he grew faint in faith, was in danger of drowning; so we, if we begin to waver or doubt, it is to be feared that we shall sink as Peter did, not into the water, but into the bottomless pit of hell fire.” (“Second Sermon on the Passion”)
0.135	“Therefore, have a sure and constant faith, not only that the death of Christ is available for all the world, but that he has made a full and sufficient sacrifice for “you,” a perfect cleansing of “your” sins, so that you may say, with the Apostle, he loved “you,” and gave himself for “you.”
0.136	For this is to make Christ “your own,” and to apply his merits to “yourself.” (“Sermon on the Sacrament, First Part”)
0.137	4. By affirming that this faith is the term or “condition of justification,” I mean, first, that there is no justification without it.
0.138	“He who does not believe is condemned already”; and as long as he does not believe, that condemnation cannot be removed, but “the wrath of God abides on him.”
0.139	As “there is no other name given under heaven” than that of Jesus of Nazareth, no other merit by which a condemned sinner can ever be saved from the guilt of sin, so there is no other way of obtaining a share in his merit than “by faith in his name.”
0.140	So that as long as we are without this faith, we are “strangers to the covenant of promise,” we are “aliens from the commonwealth of Israel, and without God in the world.”
0.141	Whatever virtues (so called) a man may have — I speak of those to whom the gospel is preached; for “what have I to do with judging those who are outside?” — whatever good works (so considered) he may do, it profits nothing; he is still a “child of wrath,” still under the curse, until he believes in Jesus.
0.142	5. Faith, therefore, is the “necessary” condition of justification; yes, and the “only necessary” condition of it.
0.143	This is the second point to be carefully observed: that the very moment God gives faith (for “it is the gift of God”) to the “ungodly” who “does not work,” that “faith is counted to him for righteousness.”
0.144	He has no righteousness at all prior to this, not even negative righteousness, or innocence.
0.145	But “faith is imputed to him for righteousness” the very moment that he believes.
0.146	Not that God (as was observed before) thinks him to be what he is not.
0.147	But as “he made Christ to be sin for us,” that is, treated him as a sinner, punishing him for our sins, so he counts us righteous from the time we believe in him; that is, he does not punish us for our sins, yes, treats us as though we were guiltless and righteous.
0.148	6. Surely the difficulty of assenting to this proposition, that “faith is the only condition of justification,” must arise from not understanding it.
0.149	We mean by it this much: that it is the only thing without which no one is justified; the only thing that is immediately, indispensably, absolutely required in order to pardon.
0.150	As, on the one hand, though a man should have everything else without faith, yet he cannot be justified; so, on the other, though he is supposed to lack everything else, yet if he has faith, he cannot but be justified.
0.151	For suppose a sinner of any kind or degree, in a full sense of his total ungodliness, of his utter inability to think, speak, or do good, and of his absolute fitness for hell-fire; suppose, I say, this sinner, helpless and hopeless, casts himself wholly on the mercy of God in Christ (which indeed he cannot do except by the grace of God): who can doubt that he is forgiven in that moment?
0.152	Who will affirm that anything more is “indispensably required” before that sinner can be justified?
0.153	Now, if there was ever one such instance from the beginning of the world (and have there not been, and are there not, ten thousand times ten thousand?), it plainly follows that faith is, in the above sense, the sole condition of justification.
0.154	7. It does not become poor, guilty, sinful worms, who receive whatever blessings they enjoy (from the least drop of water that cools our tongue to the immense riches of glory in eternity) of grace, of mere favor, and not of debt, to ask God the reasons for his conduct.
0.155	It is not fitting for us to call him into question “who gives account of none of his ways”; to demand, “Why did you make faith the condition, the only condition, of justification?
0.156	Why did you decree, ‘He who believes,’ and he only, ‘shall be saved’?”
0.157	This is the very point on which St. Paul so strongly insists in the ninth chapter of this epistle, namely, that the terms of pardon and acceptance must depend, not on us, but “on him who calls us”; that there is no “unrighteousness with God” in fixing his own terms, not according to ours, but according to his own good pleasure; who may justly say, “I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy”; namely, on him who believes in Jesus.
0.158	“So then it is not of him who wills, nor of him who runs,” to choose the condition on which he shall find acceptance, “but of God who shows mercy,” who accepts none at all except out of his own free love, his unmerited goodness.
0.159	“Therefore he has mercy on whom he will have mercy,” namely, on those who believe on the Son of his love; “and whom he will,” that is, those who do not believe, “he hardens,” leaves at last to the hardness of their hearts.
0.160	8. One reason, however, we may humbly conceive, for God’s fixing this condition of justification, “If you believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, you shall be saved,” was to “hide pride from man.”
0.161	Pride had already destroyed the very angels of God, had cast down “a third part of the stars of heaven.”
0.162	It was likewise in great measure owing to this, when the tempter said, “You shall be as gods,” that Adam fell from his own steadfastness and brought sin and death into the world.
0.163	It was therefore an instance of wisdom worthy of God to appoint such a condition of reconciliation for him and all his descendants as might effectually humble them, might abase them to the dust.
0.164	And such is faith.
0.165	It is peculiarly fitted for this end; for he who comes to God by this faith must fix his eye solely on his own wickedness, on his guilt and helplessness, without having the least regard to any supposed good in himself, to any virtue or righteousness whatever.
0.166	He must come as a “mere sinner,” inwardly and outwardly, self-destroyed and self-condemned, bringing nothing to God but ungodliness only, pleading nothing of his own but sin and misery.
0.167	Thus it is, and thus alone, when his “mouth is stopped” and he stands utterly “guilty before” God, that he can “look to Jesus” as the whole and sole “Propitiation for his sins.”
0.168	Thus only can he be “found in him,” and receive the “righteousness which is of God by faith.”
0.169	9. You ungodly one, who hear or read these words! You vile, helpless, miserable sinner!
0.170	I charge you before God, the Judge of all, go straight to him, with all your ungodliness.
0.171	Take care that you do not destroy your own soul by pleading your righteousness, more or less.
0.172	Go as altogether ungodly, guilty, lost, destroyed, deserving and dropping into hell; and you shall then find favor in his sight, and know that he justifies the ungodly.
0.173	As such you shall be brought to the “blood of sprinkling,” as an undone, helpless, damned sinner.
0.174	Thus “look to Jesus!”
0.175	There is “the Lamb of God,” who “takes away your sins!”
0.176	Plead no works, no righteousness of your own! No humility, contrition, sincerity!
0.177	In no way. That would be, in very deed, to deny the Lord who bought you.
0.178	No: plead only the blood of the covenant, the ransom paid for your proud, stubborn, sinful soul.
0.179	Who are you, who now see and feel both your inward and outward ungodliness?
0.180	You are the man!
0.181	I want you for my Lord!
0.182	I claim “you” as a child of God by faith!
0.183	The Lord has need of you.
0.184	You who feel that you are just fit for hell are just fit to advance his glory: the glory of his free grace, justifying the ungodly and him who does not work.
0.185	O come quickly! Believe in the Lord Jesus, and you, even you, are reconciled to God.
