0.1	Genesis 3:15 — “And I will put enmity between you and the woman, and between your seed and her seed; it shall bruise your head, and you shall bruise his heel.”
0.2	In reading these words to you, I may address you in the language of the holy angels to the shepherds who were watching their flocks by night: “Behold, I bring you glad tidings of great joy.”
0.3	For this is the first promise of a Savior that was made to the apostate race of Adam.
0.4	We generally look for Christ only in the New Testament; but Christianity, in one sense, is very nearly as old as the creation.
0.5	It is wonderful to observe how gradually God revealed his Son to mankind.
0.6	He began with the promise in the text, and on this the elect lived until the time of Abraham.
0.7	To him God made further disclosures of his eternal counsel concerning man’s redemption.
0.8	Afterward, at different times and in different manners, God spoke to the fathers by the prophets, until at length the Lord Jesus himself was manifested in the flesh, and came and dwelt among us.
0.9	This first promise must certainly have been only dim to our first parents, compared with the great light that we enjoy. And yet, dim as it was, we may be sure that they built upon it their hopes of everlasting salvation, and by that faith were saved.
0.10	How they came to need this promise, and what its extent and meaning are, I intend, God willing, to make the subject of your present meditation.
0.11	The fall of man is written in characters too legible not to be understood: those who deny it prove it by their very denial.
0.12	Even the heathen confessed and lamented it: they could see the streams of corruption running through the whole race of mankind, but could not trace them to the fountainhead.
0.13	Before God gave a revelation of his Son, man was a riddle to himself.
0.14	And Moses unfolds more in this one chapter (from which the text is taken) than all mankind could have found out by themselves, even if they had studied for all eternity.
0.15	In the preceding chapter he had given us a full account of how God spoke the world into being, and especially how he formed man from the dust of the earth and breathed into him the breath of life, so that he became a living soul.
0.16	A council of the Trinity was called concerning the formation of this lovely creature.
0.17	The result of that council was, “Let us make man in our image, after our likeness.
0.18	So God created man in his own image; in the image of God he created him.”
0.19	Moses remarkably repeats these words, so that we might take particular notice of our divine origin.
0.20	Never was so much expressed in so few words: no one but an inspired man could have done it.
0.21	But it is remarkable that, though Moses mentions our being made in the image of God, he mentions it only twice, and then only in passing; as though he would have said, “Man was made in honor; God made him upright; ‘in the image of God, male and female he created them.’
0.22	But man fell so soon, and became like the beasts that perish, indeed, like the devil himself, that it is hardly worth mentioning.”
0.23	How soon man fell after he was created is not told us; and therefore to fix any time is to be wise beyond what is written.
0.24	And I think those who suppose that man fell on the same day in which he was made have no sufficient ground for their opinion.
0.25	The many things crowded together in the previous chapter, such as the forming of Adam’s wife, his naming of the beasts, and his being placed in the garden which God had planted, I think require a longer span of time than one day to be carried out.
0.26	However, all agree on this: “man did not stand long.”
0.27	How long, or how short a time, I will not take it upon myself to determine.
0.28	It concerns us more to inquire how he came to fall from his steadfastness, and what was the origin and progress of the temptation that prevailed over him.
0.29	The account this chapter gives of it is very full; and it may do us much good, under God, to make some remarks on it.
0.30	“Now the serpent (says the sacred historian) was more subtle than any beast of the field that the Lord God had made, and he said to the woman, Yes, has God said, you shall not eat of every tree of the garden?”
0.31	Though this was a real serpent, yet the one who spoke was none other than the devil; perhaps for this reason he is called the old serpent, because he took possession of the serpent when he came to deceive our first parents.
0.32	The devil envied the happiness of man, who was made, as some think, to fill the place of the fallen angels.
0.33	God made man upright, and with full power to stand if he chose: he was just, therefore, in allowing him to be tempted.
0.34	If he fell, he had no one to blame but himself.
0.35	But how is Satan to bring about his fall?
0.36	He cannot do it by his power, so he attempts it by cunning: he takes possession of a serpent, which was more subtle than all the beasts of the field that the Lord God had made; so that men who are full of subtlety but have no piety are only machines for the devil to work upon, just as he pleases.
0.37	“And he said to the woman.”
0.38	Here is an example of his subtlety.
0.39	He speaks to the woman, the weaker vessel, and when she was apart from her husband and therefore more liable to be overcome: “Yes, has God said, you shall not eat of every tree of the garden?”
0.40	These words are certainly spoken in answer to something the devil either saw or heard.
0.41	In all probability the woman was now near the tree of the knowledge of good and evil (for we shall soon find her plucking an apple from it); perhaps she was looking at it, and wondering what there was in that tree more than in the others, that she and her husband should be forbidden to take of it.
0.42	Satan, seeing this, and eager to draw her into a parley with him (for if the devil can persuade us not to resist him, but to converse with him, he has gained a great point), says, “Yes, has God said, you shall not eat of every tree in the garden?”
0.43	The first thing he does is to persuade her, if possible, to entertain hard thoughts of God; this is his usual way of dealing with God’s children: “Yes, has God said, you shall not eat of every tree of the garden?
0.44	What! Has God planted a garden, and placed you in the middle of it, only to tease and perplex you?
0.45	Has he planted a garden, and yet forbidden you to make use of any of its fruits at all?”
0.46	It was impossible for him to ask a more ensnaring question in order to gain his end: for Eve was here seemingly obliged to answer and to defend God’s goodness.
0.47	And therefore —
0.48	Verses 2 and 3.
0.49	The woman said to the serpent, “We may eat of the fruit of the trees of the garden; but of the fruit of the tree that is in the middle of the garden, God has said, you shall not eat of it, neither shall you touch it, lest you die.”
0.50	The first part of the answer was good: “We may eat of the fruit of the trees of the garden; God has not forbidden us to eat of every tree of the garden.
0.51	No; we may eat of the fruit of the trees in the garden (and, it would seem, even of the tree of life, which was like a sacrament to man in the state of innocence); there is only one tree in the middle of the garden of which God has said, you shall not eat of it, neither shall you touch it, lest you die.”
0.52	Here she begins to swerve, and sin begins to be conceived in her heart.
0.53	Already she has taken in some of the serpent’s poison by talking with him, which she ought not to have done at all.
0.54	For she might easily have supposed that it could be no good being who would put such a question to her and insinuate such dishonorable thoughts of God.
0.55	She should therefore have fled from him, and not stayed to parley with him at all.
0.56	Immediately the ill effects of it appear: she begins to soften the divine threat.
0.57	God had said, “In the day you eat of it, you shall surely die”; or, dying you shall die.
0.58	But Eve says, “You shall not eat of it, neither shall you touch it, lest you die.”
0.59	We may be sure that we have fallen into temptation, and are beginning to fall by it, when we begin to think that God will not be as good as his word with regard to carrying out the threats he has pronounced against sin.
0.60	Satan knew this, and therefore cunningly
0.61	“Said to the woman (verse 4), You shall not surely die,” in an insinuating manner, “You shall not surely die.
0.62	Surely God will not be so cruel as to damn you merely for eating an apple; it cannot be.”
0.63	Alas! How many does Satan lead captive at his will by flattering them that they shall not surely die; that the torments of hell will not be eternal; that God is all mercy; that he therefore will not punish a few years of sin with an eternity of misery?
0.64	But Eve found God as good as his word; and so will all those who go on in sin under a false hope that they shall not surely die.
0.65	We may also take the words as spoken positively, and this agrees with what follows: You shall not surely die; “It is all a delusion, a mere bugbear, to keep you in servile subjection.”
0.66	For (verse 5) “God knows that on the day you eat of it, then your eyes shall be opened, and you shall be as gods, knowing good and evil.”
0.67	What child of God can expect to escape slander, when God himself was slandered like this even in paradise?
0.68	Surely Eve’s understanding must have been blinded in some measure, or she would not have allowed the tempter to speak such perverse things.
0.69	In what hateful colors God is represented here!
0.70	“God knows that on the day you eat of it, you shall be as gods” (equal with God).
0.71	So the grand temptation was that they would thereafter be under no control, equal to, if not above, the God who made them, knowing good and evil.
0.72	Eve could not tell what Satan meant by this; but she certainly understood it to mean some great privilege they were to enjoy.
0.73	And so Satan now points out a way that seems right to sinners, but does not tell them that the end of that way is death.
0.74	To give strength and force to this temptation, in all probability Satan, or the serpent, at this time plucked an apple from the tree and ate it in front of Eve; by which Eve might be led to think that the shrewdness and power of speech the serpent had above the other beasts must be owing, in large measure, to his eating that fruit; and therefore, if he had gained so much improvement, she might also expect a like benefit from it.
0.75	All this, I think, is clear; for otherwise I do not see how it could fittingly be said, “When the woman saw that it was good for food.”
0.76	How could she know it was good for food, unless she had seen the serpent feed on it?
0.77	Satan now begins to gain ground quickly.
0.78	Lust had conceived in Eve’s heart; soon it will bring forth sin.
0.79	Sin, once conceived, brings forth death.
0.80	Verse 6: “And when the woman saw that the tree was good for food, and that it was pleasant to the eyes, and a tree to be desired to make one wise, she took of the fruit of it and ate, and gave also to her husband, and he ate.”
0.81	Our senses are the landing ports of our spiritual enemies.
0.82	How necessary is that resolution of holy Job, “I have made a covenant with my eyes!”
0.83	When Eve began to gaze on the forbidden fruit with her eyes, she soon began to long for it with her heart.
0.84	When she saw that it was good for food, and pleasant to the eyes (here was the lust of the flesh and the lust of the eye), but, above all, a tree to be desired to make one wise, wiser than God would have her be, indeed, as wise as God himself, she took of the fruit of it, and gave also to her husband with her, and he ate.
0.85	As soon as she had sinned herself, she turned tempter to her husband.
0.86	It is dreadful when those who should be helpers to each other in the great work of their salvation are only promoters of each other’s damnation: but so it is.
0.87	If we ourselves are good, we shall stir others to goodness; if we do evil, we shall entice others to do evil also.
0.88	There is a close connection between doing and teaching.
0.89	How necessary, then, is it for all of us to take care that we do not sin in any way ourselves, lest we become agents for the devil and ensnare, perhaps, our nearest and dearest relatives? “She gave also to her husband with her, and he ate.”
0.90	Alas! What a complication of crimes there was in this one single act of sin!
0.91	Here is an utter disbelief of God’s threat; the utmost ingratitude to their Maker, who had so recently planted this garden and placed them in it with such a glorious and comprehensive charter.
0.92	And the utmost neglect of their descendants, who they knew were to stand or fall with them.
0.93	Here was the utmost pride of heart: they wanted to be equal with God.
0.94	Here is the utmost contempt heaped upon his threat and his law: the devil is believed and obeyed before him, and all this only to satisfy their sensual appetite.
0.95	Never was a crime of such a complicated nature committed by anyone here below: nothing but the devil’s apostasy and rebellion could equal it.
0.96	And what are the consequences of their disobedience?
0.97	Are their eyes opened?
0.98	Yes, their eyes are opened; but, alas!
0.99	It is only to see their own nakedness.
0.100	For we are told (verse 7) “that the eyes of them both were opened, and they knew that they were naked.”
0.101	Naked of God, naked of everything that was holy and good, and stripped of the divine image which they had enjoyed before.
0.102	They might rightly now be called Ichabod; for the glory of the Lord had departed from them.
0.103	O how low these sons of the morning then fell!
0.104	Out of God, into themselves; from being partakers of the divine nature, into the nature of the devil and the beast.
0.105	Well, therefore, might they know that they were naked, not only in body but in soul.
0.106	And how do they behave now that they are naked?
0.107	Do they flee to God for pardon?
0.108	Do they seek from God a robe to cover their nakedness?
0.109	No, they were now dead to God, and had become earthly, sensual, devilish: therefore, instead of turning to God for mercy, “they sewed or plaited fig leaves together, and made themselves aprons,” or things to gird about them.
0.110	This is a vivid picture of every natural man: we see that we are naked; we confess it in some measure; but instead of looking up to God for help, we patch together a righteousness of our own (as our first parents plaited fig leaves together), hoping to cover our nakedness with that.
0.111	But our righteousness will not withstand the severity of God’s judgment: it will do us no more good than the fig leaves did Adam and Eve, that is, none at all.
0.112	For (verse 8) “They heard the voice of the Lord God walking in the trees of the garden in the cool of the day; and Adam and his wife (despite their fig leaves) hid themselves from the presence of the Lord God among the trees of the garden.”
0.113	They heard the voice of the Lord God, or the Word of the Lord God, even the Lord Jesus Christ, who is “the Word that was with God, and the Word that was God.”
0.114	They heard him walking in the trees of the garden in the cool of the day.
0.115	A time, perhaps, when Adam and Eve used to go in a special manner and offer up an evening sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving.
0.116	The cool of the day.
0.117	Perhaps the sin was committed early in the morning, or at noon; but God would not come upon them immediately; he waited until the cool of the day.
0.118	And if we want to reprove others effectively, we should not do it when they are heated with passion, but wait until the cool of the day.
0.119	But what a change is here!
0.120	Instead of rejoicing at the voice of their beloved, instead of meeting him with open arms and enlarged hearts as before, they now hide themselves in the trees of the garden.
0.121	Alas, what a foolish attempt this was!
0.122	Surely they must have been naked; otherwise how could they think of hiding themselves from God?
0.123	Where could they flee from his presence?
0.124	But by their fall they had taken on an enmity against God: they now hated God their Maker, and were afraid to converse with him.
0.125	And is this not our condition by nature?
0.126	Assuredly it is. We labor to cover our nakedness with the fig leaves of our own righteousness: we hide ourselves from God as long as we can, and will not come, and never would come, if the Father did not go before us, draw us, and sweetly constrain us by his grace, as he here went before Adam.
0.127	Verse 9. “And the Lord God called to Adam, and said to him, Adam, where are you?”
0.128	“The Lord God called to Adam” (for otherwise Adam would never have called to the Lord God), and said, “Adam, where are you?
0.129	How is it that you do not come to pay your devotions as usual?”
0.130	Christians, remember that the Lord keeps an account when you fail to come to worship.
0.131	Whenever, therefore, you are tempted to withhold your attendance, let each of you imagine that you hear the Lord calling to you and saying, “O man, O woman, where are you?”
0.132	It may be understood in another and better sense: “Adam, where are you?”
0.133	What condition is your poor soul in?
0.134	This is the first thing the Lord asks a sinner and convinces him of, when he goes before him and calls him effectually by his grace; he also calls him by name; for unless God speaks to us in particular, and we know where we are, how poor, how miserable, how blind, how naked, we shall never value the redemption accomplished for us by the death and obedience of the dear Lord Jesus.
0.135	“Adam, where are you?”
0.136	Verse 10. “And he said, I heard your voice in the garden, and I was afraid.”
0.137	See what cowards sin makes of us.
0.138	If we knew no sin, we would know no fear.
0.139	“Because I was naked, and I hid myself.”
0.140	Verse 11: “And he said, Who told you that you were naked?
0.141	Have you eaten of the tree that I (your Maker and Lawgiver) commanded you not to eat of?”
0.142	God knew very well that Adam was naked, and that he had eaten of the forbidden fruit; but God would hear it from Adam’s own mouth.
0.143	In the same way God knows all our needs before we ask, and yet insists that we ask for his grace and confess our sins.
0.144	For by such acts we acknowledge our dependence on God, take shame to ourselves, and so give glory to his great name.
0.145	Verse 12. “And the man said, The woman that you gave to be with me, she gave me of the tree, and I ate.”
0.146	Never was human nature more vividly portrayed.
0.147	See what pride Adam took on by the fall!
0.148	How unwilling he is to lay the blame on himself, or take shame to himself.
0.149	This answer is full of insolence toward God, hostility against his wife, and dishonesty with regard to himself.
0.150	For in it he tacitly casts reproach on God.
0.151	“The woman that you gave to be with me.”
0.152	As much as to say, if you had not given me that woman, I would not have eaten the forbidden fruit.
0.153	So, when men sin, they lay the fault on their passions, and then blame and cast reproach on God for giving them those passions.
0.154	Their language is, “The appetites that you gave us, they deceived us; and therefore we sinned against you.”
0.155	But as God nevertheless punished Adam for listening to the voice of his wife, so he will punish those who listen to the dictates of their corrupt inclinations.
0.156	For God compels no one to sin.
0.157	Adam could have withstood his wife’s urging, if he had wished.
0.158	And so, if we look up to God, we would find grace to help in time of need.
0.159	The devil and our own hearts tempt us, but they cannot force us to consent without the agreement of our own wills.
0.160	So our damnation is of our own making, as will plainly appear on the great day, despite all men’s present shameless answers against God.
0.161	As Adam speaks insolently with regard to God, so he speaks with hostility against his wife: the woman, or this woman, she gave me.
0.162	He lays all the fault on her, and speaks of her with great contempt.
0.163	He does not say, my wife, my dear wife; but, this woman.
0.164	Sin divides the most united hearts: it is the bane of holy fellowship.
0.165	Those who have been companions in sin here, if they die without repentance, will both hate and condemn one another hereafter.
0.166	All damned souls are accusers of their brothers.
0.167	So it is, to some degree, on this side of the grave.
0.168	“The woman whom you gave to be with me, she gave me of the tree, and I ate.”
0.169	What a disingenuous speech this was!
0.170	He uses no fewer than fifteen words to excuse himself, and only one or two (in the original) to confess his fault, if it may be called a confession at all.
0.171	“The woman that you gave to be with me, she gave me of the tree”; here are fifteen words; “and I ate.”
0.172	With what reluctance do these last words come out?
0.173	How quickly are they spoken?
0.174	“And I ate.”
0.175	But so it is with an unhumbled, unregenerate heart: it will lay the fault on the dearest friend in the world, indeed on God himself, rather than take shame to itself.
0.176	We are all subject to this pride by the fall; and until our hearts are broken and made contrite by the Spirit of our Lord Jesus Christ, we shall always be charging God foolishly.
0.177	“Against you, and you only, have I sinned, that you might be justified in your saying, and clear when you are judged,” is the language of none but those who, like David, are willing to confess their faults and are truly sorry for their sins.
0.178	This was not the case with Adam; his heart was not broken; and therefore he lays the fault of his disobedience on his wife and on God, and not on himself: “The woman that you gave to be with me, she gave me of the tree, and I ate.”
0.179	Verse 13. “And the Lord God said, What is this that you have done?”
0.180	What wonderful concern God expresses in this remonstrance!
0.181	“What a flood of misery have you brought upon yourself, your husband, and your descendants?
0.182	What is this that you have done?
0.183	Disobeyed your God, obeyed the devil, and ruined your husband, for whom I made you to be a helper!
0.184	What is this that you have done?”
0.185	God would here awaken her to a sense of her crime and danger, and therefore, as it were, thunders in her ears: for the law must be preached to self-righteous sinners.
0.186	We must beware of healing before we see sinners wounded, lest we should say, Peace, peace, where there is no peace.
0.187	Complacent sinners must hear the thunderings of Mount Sinai before we bring them to Mount Zion.
0.188	Those who never preach the law, it is to be feared, are unskilled in delivering the glad tidings of the gospel.
0.189	Every minister should be a Boanerges, a son of thunder, as well as a Barnabas, a son of consolation.
0.190	There was an earthquake and a whirlwind before the small still voice came to Elijah: we must first show people that they are condemned, and then show them how they must be saved.
0.191	But how and when to preach the law, and when to apply the promises of the gospel, wisdom is profitable to direct.
0.192	“And the Lord God said to the woman, What is this that you have done?”
0.193	“And the woman said, The serpent beguiled me, and I ate.”
0.194	She does not use as many words to excuse herself as her husband did; but her heart is as unhumbled as his.
0.195	What is this, says God, that you have done?
0.196	God here charges her with doing it.
0.197	She dares not deny the fact, or say, I have not done it; but she takes all the blame off herself and lays it on the serpent: “The serpent beguiled me, and I ate.”
0.198	She does not say, “Lord, I was to blame for talking with the serpent; Lord, I did wrong in not hurrying to my husband when he put the first question to me; Lord, I plead guilty, I alone am to blame; O let not my poor husband suffer for my wickedness!”
0.199	This would have been the language of her heart had she now been a true penitent.
0.200	But both were now equally proud; therefore neither will lay the blame on themselves: “The serpent beguiled me, and I ate.
0.201	The woman that you gave to be with me, she gave me of the tree, and I ate.”
0.202	I have been the more detailed in remarking on this part of their behavior because it tends so much to magnify free grace, and plainly shows us that salvation comes only from the Lord.
0.203	Let us take a short look at the miserable circumstances our first parents were now in: they were legally and spiritually dead, children of wrath, and heirs of hell.
0.204	They had eaten the fruit of which God had commanded them that they should not eat; and when arraigned before God, although their crime was so complicated, they could not be brought to confess it.
0.205	What reason can be given why the sentence of death should not be pronounced against the prisoners at the bar?
0.206	All must admit that they deserve to die.
0.207	Indeed, how can God, consistently with his justice, possibly forgive them?
0.208	He had threatened that in the day they ate of the forbidden fruit they should “surely die”; and if he did not carry out this threat, the devil might then slander the Almighty indeed.
0.209	And yet mercy cries, Spare these sinners, spare the work of your own hands.
0.210	Behold, then, wisdom devises a plan by which God may be just and yet be merciful; be faithful to his threat, punish the offense, and at the same time spare the offender.
0.211	An amazing scene of divine love here opens to our view, which had been hidden in the heart of God from all eternity!
0.212	Although Adam and Eve were so unhumbled, and did not offer so much as one single petition for pardon, God immediately passes sentence on the serpent and reveals to them a Savior.
0.213	Verse 14. “And the Lord God said to the serpent, Because you have done this, you are cursed above all cattle, and above every beast of the field; upon your belly you shall go, and dust you shall eat all the days of your life”; that is, he should be in subjection, and his power should always be limited and restrained.
0.214	“His enemies shall lick the very dust,” says the Psalmist.
0.215	(Verse 15.) “And I will put enmity between you and the woman, and between your seed and her seed: it shall bruise your head, and you shall bruise his heel.”
0.216	Before I go on to explain this verse, I cannot help noticing one great mistake of which the author of The Whole Duty of Man is guilty, in making this verse contain a covenant between God and Adam, as though God now dealt with Adam personally, as before the fall.
0.217	For, speaking of the second covenant in his preface, concerning caring for the soul, he says, “This second covenant was made with Adam, and with us in him, immediately after the fall, and is briefly contained in these words, Genesis 3:15, where God declares, ‘The seed of the woman shall break the serpent’s head’; and this was made up, as the first was, of some mercies to be afforded by God, and some duties to be performed by us.”
0.218	This is exceedingly false theology: for those words are not spoken to Adam; they are directed only to the serpent.
0.219	Adam and Eve stood by as criminals, and God could not deal with them, because they had broken his covenant.
0.220	And it is so far from being a covenant in which “some mercies are to be afforded by God, and some duties to be performed by us,” that there is not a word here pointing that way; it is only a declaration of a free gift of salvation through Jesus Christ our Lord.
0.221	God the Father and God the Son had entered into a covenant from all eternity concerning the salvation of the elect, in which God the Father promised that, if the Son would offer his soul as a sacrifice for sin, he should see his seed.
0.222	Now this is an open revelation of that secret covenant, and therefore God speaks in the most positive terms: “It shall bruise your head, and you shall bruise his heel.”
0.223	God had dealt with the first Adam before; he proved false: God therefore, to secure the second covenant from being broken, puts it into the hands of the second Adam, the Lord from heaven.
0.224	Adam, after the fall, no longer stood as our representative; he and Eve were only private persons, as we are, and were only to lay hold by faith of the declaration of mercy contained in this promise (as they really did), and by that they were saved.
0.225	I do not deny that we are to believe and obey, if we are to be everlastingly saved.
0.226	Faith and obedience are conditions, if we only mean that in order they come before our salvation; but I deny that these are proposed by God to Adam, or that God deals with him in this promise as he did before the fall under the covenant of works.
0.227	For how could that be, when Adam and Eve were now prisoners at the bar, without strength to perform any conditions at all?
0.228	The truth is this: God, as a reward for Christ’s sufferings, promised to give the elect faith and repentance, in order to bring them to eternal life; and both these, and everything else necessary for their everlasting happiness, are infallibly secured to them in this promise; as Mr. Rastan, an excellent Scottish theologian, clearly shows in a book entitled “A View of the Covenant of Grace.”
0.229	This is by no means an unnecessary distinction; it is a matter of great importance: for want of knowing this, people have been misled for so long. They have been taught that they must do this and that, as though they were under a covenant of works, and then for doing this they would be saved.
0.230	Whereas, on the contrary, people should be taught that the Lord Jesus was the second Adam, with whom the Father entered into covenant for fallen man; that they can now do nothing of or for themselves, and should therefore come to God, begging him to give them faith, by which they will be enabled to lay hold of the righteousness of Christ; and that they will then show forth that faith by their works, out of love and gratitude to the ever-blessed Jesus, their most glorious Redeemer, for what he has done for their souls.
0.231	This is a consistent, scriptural scheme; without holding this, we must run into one of two bad extremes, I mean Antinomianism on the one hand or Arminianism on the other: from both of which may the good Lord deliver us!
0.232	But to proceed: by the seed of the woman we are here to understand the Lord Jesus Christ, who, though true God of true God, was, for us men and for our salvation, to have a body prepared for him by the Holy Spirit, and to be born of a woman who never knew a man, and by his obedience and death to make atonement for man’s transgression, and bring in an everlasting righteousness, work a new nature in them, and so bruise the serpent’s head, that is, destroy his power and dominion over them.
0.233	By the serpent’s seed we are to understand the devil and all his children, who are permitted by God to tempt and sift his children.
0.234	But, blessed be God, he can reach no further than our heel.
0.235	There is no doubt that Adam and Eve understood this promise in this sense; for it is plain that in the latter part of the chapter sacrifices were instituted.
0.236	For where would those skins come from, of which God made them coats, but from beasts slain for sacrifice?
0.237	We find Abel, as well as Cain, offering sacrifice in the next chapter; and the apostle tells us he did it by faith, no doubt in this promise.
0.238	And Eve, when Cain was born, said, “I have gotten a man from the Lord,” or (as Mr. Henry observes it may be rendered), “I have gotten a man — the Lord — the promised Messiah.”
0.239	Some further suppose that Eve was the first believer; and therefore they translate it this way: “The seed (not of the, but) of this woman”; which magnifies the grace of God all the more, that she who was first in the transgression should be the first partaker of redemption.
0.240	Adam believed also, and was saved: for the Lord God made coats of skins for Adam and his wife, and clothed them; which was a remarkable type of their being clothed with the righteousness of our Lord Jesus Christ.
0.241	This promise was literally fulfilled in the person of our Lord Jesus Christ.
0.242	Satan bruised his heel when he tempted him for forty days together in the wilderness; he bruised his heel when he raised up fierce persecution against him during the time of his public ministry; in a special manner he bruised his heel when our Lord complained that his soul was exceedingly sorrowful, even to death, and he sweat great drops of blood falling upon the ground in the garden; he bruised his heel when he put it into the heart of Judas to betray him; and he bruised him most of all when his agents nailed him to a cursed tree, and our Lord cried out, “My God, my God, why have you forsaken me?”
0.243	Yet in all this the blessed Jesus, the seed of the woman, bruised Satan’s cursed head; for in that he was tempted, he was able to help those who are tempted.
0.244	By his stripes we are healed.
0.245	The chastisement of our peace was upon him.
0.246	By dying he destroyed the one who had the power of death, that is, the devil.
0.247	In this way he stripped principalities and powers, and openly made a show of them, triumphing over them upon the cross.
