0.1	This psalm is called the song of loves—the most pure and spiritual, the most dear and delightful loves; namely, those which are between Christ the beloved and his church, which is his spouse. In it is set forth, first, the Lord Jesus Christ with regard to his majesty, power, and divinity, his truth, meekness, and equity; and then the spouse is set forth with regard to her ornaments, companions, attendants, and posterity; and both with regard to their comeliness and beauty.
0.2	After the description of Christ, an invitation to his espousals is given to the children of men, who are called by the name of daughter; and therefore it applies particularly to you, my dear sisters, since you are the daughters of men—yet not so as to exclude the sons of men.
0.3	I shall now, therefore, consider the words as spoken to you in particular, and as containing this doctrine:
0.4	That the Lord Jesus Christ invites the daughters of men to be his spouse, and greatly desires the beauty of those who, forgetting their own people and their father’s house, listen, consider, and incline to his invitation, and join themselves to him in this relation.
0.5	I shall show:
0.6	I. How Christ espouses himself to the children of men, but more especially to the daughters of men.
0.7	The Lord Jesus Christ espouses himself to the children of men in this world, but the public solemnization of the marriage is reserved until the last day, when his spouse shall be brought forth to him in white robes and a garment of perfect righteousness, richer and more exquisite, my dear sisters, than any of your needlework; and the marriage feast will be kept in his Father’s house in heaven, when they shall be received into the nearest and closest embraces of his love.
0.8	The marriage knot is tied here, and in it four things are included:
0.9	First, mutual choice;
0.10	Secondly, mutual affection;
0.11	Thirdly, mutual union;
0.12	Fourthly, mutual obligation.
0.13	First, my dear sisters, there is a mutual choice, which is not only in Christ as Mediator, but also by Christ as the eternal Son of God—yes, God himself—notwithstanding all that the polite Arians and Socinians say to the contrary.
0.14	The Lord Jesus Christ, my dear sisters, chooses you purely by his free grace; it is freely of his own mercy that he brings you into the marriage covenant. You who have so grievously offended him—yet the Lord Jesus Christ has chosen you. You did not, you would not, have chosen him; but once he has chosen you, my dear sisters, then, and not until then, you make choice of him as your Lord and Husband.
0.15	When the Lord Jesus Christ first comes to you, he finds you full of sin and pollution; you are deformed, defiled, enslaved, poor, miserable, and wretched, very despicable and loathsome because of sin. And he chooses you, not because of your holiness, nor your beauty, nor because you are qualified for them; no, the Lord Jesus Christ puts such qualifications upon you as may make you fit for his embrace; and you are drawn to choose the Lord Jesus Christ because he first chose you.
0.16	Secondly, in this espousal of yours, my dear sisters, there is a mutual affection; this accompanies the choice.
0.17	Your hearts are drawn out after Christ; your souls pant and long for him; you cannot rest until you are engaged to this Jesus. You are ready to cry out continually, “None but Christ, none but Christ!” This is the language of your hearts, if you are truly aware of your need of him.
0.18	The better acquainted you become with this Lord Jesus, the more pleased you are with your choice, and the more your affections are drawn toward him.
0.19	And where can you place your affections better than upon that Jesus who shed his blood for your sakes?
0.20	Surely he deserves both your love and your affections. Go on, go on, my dear sisters, so that your affections may grow stronger and stronger.
0.21	Thirdly, there is not only mutual choice and mutual affection, but also mutual union; and here the marriage chiefly lies, in this union. Christ and souls are contracted, and the knot is tied so fast that neither men on earth, however great they may be, nor devils in hell, even if they should combine all their wrath and rage together, can dissolve it or untie it. No, my dear sisters, it is indissoluble, for the union is by the Spirit on Christ’s part, and by faith on yours. By the Spirit Christ lays hold on you, and by faith you lay hold on him; and so the match is made. Christ becomes yours—his person, his portion, and all his benefits are yours; and you become Christ’s—your persons, your hearts, and all that you have are surrendered to him. And O that they may be so more and more!
0.22	Fourthly, there is a mutual obligation between Christ and his spouse.
0.23	Christ binds himself to love you here; he will not—indeed, he never will—leave you. He will protect you from the malice of the Pharisees of this generation; he will provide for you in all difficulties; he will live with you here, and at last he will take you to himself, to live with him forever.
0.24	And you are bound to him to be loving, loyal, faithful, and obedient; and you are to cling closely to him as long as you live. And then you will find that you have married to the best advantage, both for soul and body, for time and for eternity.
0.25	II. Christ invites all of you to be his spouse.
0.26	And it is for this reason that he sends forth his ministers to preach.
0.27	It is this that makes me come among you in this way: that you would accept this invitation, to which I call you in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, and entreat you to take him on his own terms.
0.28	He calls all of you, my sisters, whether older or younger, married or unmarried, of high rank or of the lowest station, the poorest servants—yes, the rabble of this world, as the world calls you—who are willing to be espoused to the Lord Jesus Christ.
0.29	I say, the poor are as welcome to be Christ’s spouse as those who are rich.
0.30	He does not regard the rich more than the poor; he chose a humble virgin, engaged to a carpenter, to be his mother; and he chooses and calls all such to be his spouse. So do not be discouraged that you are despised in the world; for if you are only loved by Christ and espoused to him, it will more than make up for all the trouble you have met with here.
0.31	III. Those who would be espoused to Christ must listen, consider, and incline to his invitation, and forget even their father’s house.
0.32	Those who would be espoused to Christ must listen.
0.33	“Listen, O daughter.” Many among you, my sisters, stop their ears against the calls of the gospel; they shut their ears like the deaf adder, which will not listen to the voice of the charmer, however wisely he charms.
0.34	You will not listen to the invitations of Christ; you can listen to the vanities of the world and be delighted with the espousals of the world, but you never think of, nor are delighted with, the espousals of Christ.
0.35	It was by the ear that the temptation of sin was received by the first man, when he departed from God; and by the ear the invitation to be Christ’s spouse must be received, before the heart will be opened to receive Jesus Christ in this marriage relation.
0.36	If you would be espoused to Christ, my dear sisters, you must consider Christ’s invitation.
0.37	It is not a careless or mere hearing of Christ’s invitation that will be of any use to you, or will make up the match between Christ and your souls; no, you must receive Christ in the heart. You must consider the thing itself, its advantages, and the difference between Christ’s invitations and the devil’s temptations, or any of the world’s offers.
0.38	Those who would be espoused to Christ must be inclined to accept Christ’s invitation.
0.39	“Listen, O daughter, consider, and incline your ear.”
0.40	This means to incline your hearts. You must consent with your wills; there must be compliance with the proposal of Christ, and you must have desires after Christ; and then your hearts will say, “Lord, let us be your spouse, and may you be our beloved.”
0.41	You must also forget your father’s house.
0.42	“Listen, O daughter, and consider, and forget your father’s house.”
0.43	You are not here told to cast off all affection for your natural relations; but you must forget all relations to the extent of being ready to give up all their favor, when it stands in competition with that of the Lord Jesus Christ. And do not let your worldly friends and relations hinder you from closing with and espousing the Lord Jesus.
0.44	I earnestly beg you to suffer the loss of anything rather than lose his favors. You must indeed forget your own people; that is, you must forget all the evil customs you have learned in your father’s house, and forsake all your vain conduct—your reading of plays, novels, or romances; and you must keep from learning to sing the songs of the drunkard; for Christ, if you are his spouse, has redeemed you.
0.45	Those of you, my dear sisters, who are espoused to the Lord Jesus Christ are very beautiful.
0.46	I do not mean with respect to your bodies; you may have less outward comeliness than others as far as your bodies are concerned, but as to your souls you will excel in beauty—not so much in the eyes of man as in the eyes of God. Such people have the most beautiful image of God stamped upon them; no one else in the world has the least spark of spiritual beauty.
0.47	Those who are not married to Christ are unregenerate; they are not born again, nor brought from sin to God, which must be done before you are espoused to Christ.
0.48	And the Lord Jesus Christ desires to see this beauty in his spouse, for he cries out, “O my dove, you are in the clefts of the rock, in the hidden places of the stairs; let me see your countenance, let me hear your voice, for your voice is sweet, and your countenance is comely.”
0.49	He calls his spouse his love, since she is the dear object of his love; and he admires her loveliness. He repeats it twice in one verse: “See, you are fair, my love; see, you are fair.”
0.50	So you see how he describes their beauty.
0.51	And then, my sisters, we have a wonderful expression of Christ to his spouse: “You have captivated my heart, my sister, my spouse; you have captivated my heart with one of your eyes, with one chain of your neck.”
0.52	So you see how pleased the Lord Jesus Christ is with his spouse; and will you not, therefore, be espoused to the Lord Jesus?
0.53	I offer Jesus Christ to all of you. However notorious you have been for sin—even if you have been as great a harlot as Mary Magdalene was—once you are espoused to Christ, you shall be forgiven.
0.54	Therefore do not be discouraged by whatever slights and contempt the world may heap upon you, but come and join yourselves to the Lord Jesus Christ, and all your sins shall be washed away in his blood. And once you are espoused to Jesus, you are separated from sin; you are born again.
0.55	You are now, as it were, espoused to sin; sin is your husband, and you are too fond of it. But once you are married to Christ, when you are born again, then you may be said to die to sin; but until then, sin lives in your affections. Therefore, my sisters, give sin its death-wound in your hearts. You have been called by the word time after time, and it has had no effect on you; but when you are espoused to the Lord Jesus Christ, then you will be brought to him by his Spirit. You will then lay hold on him by faith; his Spirit will draw you to himself; he will make you willing in the day of his power; he will give you faith in him.
0.56	Faith is the hand of the soul which lays hold on Christ; therefore do not rest content until you have this grace of faith worked in you with power; do not be content until you have received the Lord Jesus Christ.
0.57	Embrace Christ in the arms of your dearest love. You love the Lord Jesus Christ with sincerity when you love and esteem him above father, mother, and all the delights and pleasures of this life; but if you delight in anything this world can produce more than in the Lord Jesus Christ, you do not have true love for him.
0.58	If you are espoused to Christ, you have acquaintance and fellowship with him; you will endeavor to promote his interest and advance his name in the world. When others are going to the polite and fashionable amusements of life, you will be laboring to bring honor to the Lord Jesus Christ; you will commend your beloved above all other beloveds, and endeavor to bring others to love him.
0.59	Can you, my dear sisters, who are now assembled to worship God, show such evidence of your espousals to the Lord Jesus Christ?
0.60	O how joyful, how comforting a state this is!
0.61	Surely this is a marriage worth seeking after; this is the only desirable marriage, and the Lord Jesus Christ is the only lover worth seeking after.
0.62	Now, my dear sisters, I shall speak a few words to those of you who have not yet espoused yourselves to the Lord Jesus.
0.63	It is a great sin, and surely you greatly affront the Lord who bought you.
0.64	It is also your folly to refuse and neglect the gracious offers of being the spouse of Christ. By this you forfeit all the love he would bestow on you; by this you choose rags before robes, dross before gold, pebbles before jewels, guilt before a pardon, wounds before healing, defilement before cleansing, deformity before comeliness, trouble before peace, slavery before liberty, the service of the devil before the service of Christ.
0.65	By this you choose dishonor before a crown, death before life, hell before heaven, eternal misery and torment before everlasting joy and glory.
0.66	And is there need of any further evidence of your folly and madness in refusing and neglecting Christ as your spouse?
0.67	My dear sisters, I would exceed the limits of your time if I were to set out in detail all the advantages you would obtain by being espoused to the Lord Jesus.
0.68	This is your wisdom: they are foolish virgins who refuse; but you are the wise virgins who have accepted the Lord Jesus Christ and have given yourselves to him. You have made the wisest choice; and however the blind world may consider you fools, and despise you as being methodically mad, yet you are wise in the esteem of God, and will one day appear so in the esteem of those who now despise you.
0.69	It is your glory that you are espoused to the Lord Jesus; and therefore glory in your espousal—glory not in yourselves, but in the Lord who has so freely and graciously bestowed these favors upon you.
0.70	It is your safety to be espoused to the Lord Jesus Christ; he will protect and defend you even from sin and Satan and eternal ruin, and so far you are safe. He has regard for you in times of danger from men, and these times of danger seem to be hastening on. It is now rising like a black cloud no bigger than a man’s hand, and by and by it will spread over the heavens, and when it is full it will burst; but if you are espoused to Christ, you are safe.
0.71	Now, my dear sisters, I shall conclude with an earnest exhortation to high and low, rich and poor, one with another, to be espoused to Christ.
0.72	Let me speak in a special way to you young women who are not yet espoused to Christ.
0.73	It may be that a wish to satisfy your curiosity has brought many of you here; yet perhaps this may be the time when you shall be brought home to embrace the Lord Jesus and be espoused to him.
0.74	And O that I may persuade you, by his Spirit, to espouse yourselves to the Lord of life!
0.75	And if you are only brought to close with the Lord Jesus Christ, I shall attain my end, and then both you and I shall rejoice that I preached this sermon to you.
0.76	Come, virgins, will you give me permission to be a suitor to you—not in my own name, but in the name of the Lord?
0.77	O that I may prevail with you for your affections, and persuade you to give them to Christ!
0.78	May I be the instrument of bringing your souls to Christ!
0.79	May I be the instrument of joining you and Christ together this day!
0.80	Do not be coy (bashful, shy; showing reluctance to make a definite commitment), as some of you perhaps are in other loves. Modesty and the virgin blush may very well become you when proposals of another kind are made to you; but here coyness is silly, and backwardness to accept this proposal is shameful. You have ten thousand times more reason to blush at refusing Christ as your beloved than at accepting him—when otherwise the devil and sin would carry off your virgin affections.
0.81	Never was a better proposal made to you; never was such a match offered to you as this—of being matched and espoused to the Lord Jesus Christ.
0.82	Consider who the Lord Jesus is, to whom you are invited to espouse yourselves: he is the best husband; there is none comparable to Jesus Christ.
0.83	Do you desire one who is great?
0.84	He is of the highest dignity; he is the glory of heaven, the darling of eternity, admired by angels, dreaded by devils, and adored by saints.
0.85	For you to be espoused to so great a king—what honor will you have by this espousal?
0.86	Do you desire one who is rich?
0.87	None is comparable to Christ; the fullness of the earth belongs to him.
0.88	If you are espoused to Christ, you shall share in his unsearchable riches; you shall receive of his fullness, even grace for grace, here, and hereafter you shall be admitted to glory, and shall live with this Jesus for all eternity.
0.89	Do you desire one who is wise?
0.90	There is none comparable to Christ for wisdom.
0.91	His knowledge is infinite, and his wisdom corresponds to it.
0.92	And if you are espoused to Christ, he will guide and counsel you, and make you wise for salvation.
0.93	Do you desire one who is mighty, who can defend you against your enemies, and against all the insults and reproaches of the Pharisees of this generation?
0.94	There is none who can equal Christ in power; for the Lord Jesus Christ has all power.
0.95	Do you desire one who is good?
0.96	There is none like Christ in this respect; others may have some goodness, but it is imperfect. Christ’s goodness is complete and perfect; he is full of goodness, and in him dwells no evil.
0.97	Do you desire one who is beautiful?
0.98	His eyes are most sparkling, his looks and glances of love are enrapturing, his smiles are most delightful and refreshing to the soul: Christ is the loveliest person of all in the world.
0.99	Do you desire one who can love you?
0.100	None can love you like Christ. His love, my dear sisters, is incomprehensible; his love surpasses all other loves. The love of the Lord Jesus is first, without beginning; his love is free, without any motive; his love is great, without any measure; his love is constant, without any change; and his love is everlasting.
0.101	It was the love of the Lord Jesus Christ, my dear sisters, which brought him down from heaven, and which veiled his divinity in a human soul and body; for he is God over all, blessed forever. It was love that made him subject to hunger, thirst, and sorrow; he was humbled even to death for you. For you who are espoused to him he underwent the painful, shameful, and ignominious death of the cross. And can you, my sisters, hear this and not be moved to think that the blessed Jesus underwent all this for such sinful creatures as you and I are?
0.102	And when, out of love, he had finished the redemption on earth, as far as was needed for satisfaction, it was his love that carried him back to heaven, where he was before, so that he might apply what he had purchased, that there he might make intercession for those whom he had redeemed, and prepare a place for them—even glorious mansions with himself, in the house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens.
0.103	It is out of love that he sends such tokens to his people from heaven to earth, which he conveys to them through his ordinances, by his Spirit.
0.104	Surely, then, none is so deserving as the Lord Jesus Christ for you to espouse yourselves to. If you are espoused to Christ, he is yours—all that he is and all that he has; you shall have his heart, and share in the choicest expressions of his dearest love.
0.105	The Lord Jesus Christ, my dear sisters, begs you to be his spouse.
0.106	We ministers have a commission from the Lord Jesus Christ to invite you, in his name, to this very thing; and Christ’s invitations are real, general, frequent, earnest, and free.
0.107	Christ’s invitations to you to be his spouse are real; and as the thing is real, so you, my dear sisters, are really invited to it.
0.108	The Lord does not mock and deceive you, like some pretending lovers who feign love to virgins until they have gained their affections, and then falsely and basely abandon them, never really intending either to espouse or to marry them. But the Lord really intends the thing in his invitations to you; he never cast off anyone whose consent and affections he had gained. Again,
0.109	Christ’s invitations to you, my dear sisters, are general.
0.110	All of you are invited; none of you are excluded. All sorts of sinners are invited; the most vile and abominable sinners, the most notorious transgressors, are invited to be Christ’s spouse, and shall be as welcome as any to the embraces of his love.
0.111	Christ’s invitations to you are frequent. Jesus Christ calls on you frequently; he has waited on you time after time, one year after another; and he now invites you, through me, this day, to come to him.
0.112	Do not slight this invitation, but receive it with joy and thankfulness.
0.113	Come, I beg you, to this Jesus, who thus invites you to be his spouse. Again,
0.114	Christ’s invitations to be his spouse are earnest. He calls upon you—and not only calls, but calls earnestly too; yes, he uses many arguments with you; he will press you to come to him; he is unwilling to take any denial from you. He knocks, and knocks hard, at the door of your hearts to be received; and surely you will not deny the Lord of life and glory, who died for you and gave himself for you. O my dear sisters, let this be the evening of your espousals to the Lord Jesus Christ.
0.115	He invites you freely to be his spouse, for all his invitations are free; he does not expect a dowry with you, as worldly lovers do. He wants nothing from you; no, you must have nothing, if you would be espoused to the Lord Jesus Christ.
0.116	If you are poor, miserable, blind, and naked, Jesus Christ will supply all these defects out of his own free mercy; he will fill and supply you with all things out of his treasury; he will make you fit for himself; he will prepare you to live with him forever.
0.117	Consider: if you are once espoused to Christ, once joined in this relation, you shall never be separated from him; neither men nor devils shall be able to separate you. None—none—shall part you; and when death breaks all other bonds, it shall not break the marriage bond between you and Christ, but shall bring you into the most full and everlasting possession of your beloved.
0.118	And what do you now say, young women?
0.119	Shall I have consent for my master, or be sent away with a rebuff and refusal? No, I cannot carry such a message to my master; I hope better things of you, my sisters, and things that accompany salvation. It seems to me that by this time you should begin to have a mind for Jesus Christ; you look as if you desired him; you listen as if you would consent.
0.120	What do you say?
0.121	Shall the match be made this evening between Christ and your souls?
0.122	O that I may be the instrument of joining your hands—or rather your hearts—together! O that I may be the instrument to tie that knot which can never be loosed!
0.123	Some marry in haste and repent at leisure; but if you were once espoused to Jesus Christ, you would never repent. Nothing would grieve you except that you were not joined to him sooner; and you would not be separated again for all the world.
0.124	Shall this be the day of your espousals?
0.125	Some of you have waited a long time; and will you delay any longer?
0.126	If you will not now, perhaps you may never have another opportunity; this may be the last time of asking, and therefore it is dangerous to refuse. Some of you are very young, too young for other espousals; but none of you, my dear sisters, are too young to be espoused to the Lord Jesus Christ. In other espousals you must have the consent of your parents; but in this you are at your own disposal. You may give yourselves, and ought to match yourselves, to Christ, whether your parents consent or not.
0.127	But what if any of you should ask what you must do in order to be espoused to Christ?
0.128	You must be aware of your need of being espoused to him, and until you are aware of your need of the Lord Jesus Christ, you cannot be espoused to him. You must have desires after this Jesus, and seek him for an interest in him; you must cry to him nightly to espouse you to himself. Put off the filthiness of sin and all its defilements; and then, my sisters, put on the white raiment and clean garments which Christ has provided for you, the robes of his righteousness. In these garments you shall be beautiful, and in these garments you shall be accepted. You must have the wedding garment on; you must put off all your own good works, for they will only be a means of keeping you from Christ. No, you must come as not having your own righteousness, which is of the law, but you must have the righteousness of Christ.
0.129	Therefore, come to the Lord Jesus Christ, and he will give it to you; he will not send you away without it.
0.130	Receive him on his own terms, and he is yours forever. O devote yourselves to him, soul and body and all, to be his forever; and Christ will be yours—and then happy, happy are you that you were ever born!
0.131	But if any of you die before this espousal to the Lord Jesus Christ, then woe, woe to you that you ever had a being in life! But if you go to Christ, you shall be espoused to the Lord Jesus. However great your sins have been, yes, the blood of Christ will cleanse you from them; the marriage covenant between Christ and your souls will dissolve all your sins. You will then be weary of your old ways, for all things will become new in your souls.
0.132	Now, my dear sisters, I shall conclude by speaking just a word or two to those of you who are already espoused to the Lord Jesus Christ.
0.133	O admire, admire the rich and free grace which has brought you into this relation! Is not this an instance of the greatest love, that you should be the spouse of the Lord Jesus Christ?
0.134	You who had no beauty, you who had no comeliness, who were full of sin—that he should embrace such as you and I are; that we should be taken into the embrace of this Lord Jesus!
0.135	O infinite, condescending kindness!
0.136	O amazing love! Reverence, reverence this Lord Jesus Christ, I beg you.
0.137	He is your Lord, and you must reverence him, love him, and be faithful to him, be subject to him, and be careful to please him in everything. Endeavor to keep up a daily communion with him; look for, long for, and prepare for Christ’s second appearing, when the nuptials between you shall be solemnized, and you shall live with him in mansions of everlasting joy, where you shall love and live with this King of glory forever and ever.
0.138	I do not know how to conclude; it seems to me I could speak to you until midnight, if it would bring you to the Lord Jesus Christ and cause you to be espoused to him. For indeed that will be the espousal that will turn to the greatest advantage, as you will find by experience, if you will only make the trial; and that you may do so, my prayers and my constant endeavor shall be employed.
0.139	I will, my dear sisters, spend and be spent for you, and by the help of God I will persevere in this that I have begun. And since many of you may have opportunity some evening in the week, without interfering with the business of life, I shall therefore, my sisters, be either here or wherever you shall be publicly informed. I will not mind being reproached or despised; the men of this world may use whatever language they please; they may say I am a Methodist.
0.140	Indeed, my sisters, I am resolved, by the grace of God, to use all the methods I can to pluck you from Satan, that you may be as brands plucked from the burning fire. This shall be my method, which I hope will be the means of effectually saving your precious and immortal souls.
0.141	And if I am the instrument of this, I shall rejoice—yes, and I will rejoice—in spite of whatever men or devils can say or do to the contrary. And may the Lord Jesus Christ direct and assist me at all times to do what will be most for his glory and the welfare of your souls; and may you all say a hearty Amen to it.
0.142	“Now may the Lord Jesus Christ, who is God over all, blessed forever, assist and watch over you, keep you from all evil and sin here, and present you faultless before his Father at the great day of account!
0.143	To this Lord Jesus Christ, the Father, and the blessed Spirit, three persons and yet but one eternal and invisible God, be ascribed all honor, power, glory, might, majesty, and dominion, now, henceforth, and forevermore. Amen, Amen.”
0.144	“The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, the love of God, and the fellowship of the Holy Spirit be with you all, to comfort you under tribulation and deliver you from it; to preserve you to your respective places of abode; and when you are there, to keep you in his fear, that you may live to his glory; that to live may be Christ, and to die be your eternal gain; so that you may live with him through eternal ages, and sing Hallelujahs to him forever. Amen.”
