0.1	It has been objected by some who dissent from the present ecclesiastical establishment—indeed, I may add, by others also who are actually friends to it—that the ministers of the Church of England preach themselves, and not Christ Jesus the Lord; that they entertain their people with lectures of mere morality, without declaring to them the glad tidings of salvation by Jesus Christ.
0.2	How well grounded such an objection may be is not my business to inquire. All I shall say on the point at present is this: whenever such a grave objection is urged against the whole body of the clergy in general, every honest minister of Jesus Christ should do his utmost to cut off every kind of occasion from those who desire an occasion to take offense at us; so that, by hearing us continually sounding forth the word of truth, and declaring with all boldness and assurance of faith “that there is no other name given under heaven by which they can be saved, but that of Jesus Christ,” they may be ashamed of this same confident boasting of theirs against us.
0.3	It was a regard for this objection, joined with the pleasantness and delightfulness of the subject (for who can help delighting to speak of that which the blessed angels desire to look into?), that induces me to speak a little on that great and fundamental article of our faith: namely, our being freely justified by the precious blood of Jesus Christ.
0.4	“But you are washed, but you are sanctified, but you are justified, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by the Spirit of our God.”
0.5	Since the words begin with the particle “but,” they plainly refer to something that went before; it may therefore not be improper, before I come down to particulars, to consider the words as they stand in relation to the context.
0.6	In the verses immediately preceding, the apostle had been listing many notorious sins—drunkenness, adultery, fornication, and the like—the commission of which, without a true and heartfelt repentance, he tells the Corinthians, would entirely shut them out of the kingdom of God.
0.7	But then, lest on the one hand they should grow spiritually proud by seeing themselves differ from their unconverted brothers, and so be tempted to despise them and say with the self-conceited hypocrite in the prophet, “Do not come near me, for I am holier than you”; or, on the other hand, by looking back on the multitude of their past offenses, should be inclined to think their sins were too many and too grievous to be forgiven: he first, in order to keep them humble, reminds them of their sad state before conversion, telling them in plain terms, “such (or, as it might be read, these things) were some of you”—not only one, but all that sad catalogue of vices I have been drawing up, some of you were once guilty of; but then, at the same time, to preserve them from despair, see how he brings them glad tidings of great joy: “But you are washed, but you are sanctified, but you are justified in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by the Spirit of our God.”
0.8	The former part of this text, our being sanctified, I have already treated to some extent; I would now enlarge on our being freely justified by the precious obedience and death of Jesus Christ: “But you are justified in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ.”
0.9	From these words I shall consider three things:
0.10	First, what is meant by the word “justified.”
0.11	Second, I shall endeavor to prove that all mankind in general, and every individual person in particular, stands in need of being justified.
0.12	Third, that there is no possibility of obtaining this justification, which we so greatly need, except by the all-perfect obedience and precious death of Jesus Christ.
0.13	First, I am to consider what is meant by the word “justified.”
0.14	“But you are justified,” says the apostle; which is as though he had said, You have your sins forgiven, and are regarded by God as though you had never offended him at all: for that is the meaning of the word “justified” in almost all the passages of Holy Scripture where this word is used.
0.15	Thus, when this same apostle writes to the Romans, he tells them that “whom God called, those he also justified”; and that this word “justified” implies a blotting out of all our transgressions is evident from what follows, “them he also glorified,” which could not be if a justified person were not regarded by God as though he had never offended him at all.
0.16	And again, speaking of Abraham’s faith, he tells them that “Abraham believed on Him who justifies the ungodly”—who acquits and clears the ungodly man; for it is a legal term, and alludes to a judge acquitting an accused criminal of the charge laid against him.
0.17	This expression the apostle himself explains by a quotation from the Psalms: “Blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputes no sin.”
0.18	From all these proofs, and many others that might be offered, it is evident that by being justified we are to understand being so acquitted in the sight of God as to be regarded as though we had never offended him at all.
0.19	And in this sense we are to understand that article which we profess to believe in our creed, when each of us declares in his own person, I believe the forgiveness of sins.
0.20	This leads me to the
0.21	Second thing proposed: to prove that all mankind in general, and every individual person in particular, stands in need of being justified.
0.22	And indeed the apostle assumes this in the words of the text, “But you are justified,” thereby implying that the Corinthians (and consequently all mankind, since there is no difference, as will be shown later) stood in need of being justified.
0.23	But so as not to rest on bare assumptions, in my further enlargement on this head I shall endeavor to prove that we all stand in need of being justified on account of the sin of our natures and the sin of our lives.
0.24	1. First, I affirm that we all stand in need of being justified on account of the sin of our natures: for we are all chargeable with original sin, or the sin of our first parents.
0.25	This proposition, though it may be denied by a self-justifying unbeliever who “will not come to Christ that he may have life,” can never be denied by anyone who believes that St. Paul’s epistles were written by divine inspiration; for there we are told that “in Adam all died”—that is, Adam’s sin was imputed to all; and lest we should forget to make a particular application, it is added in another place “that there is none who does good (that is, by nature), no, not one; that we have all gone out of the way (of original righteousness), and are by nature the children of wrath.”
0.26	And even David, who was a man after God’s own heart, and who, if anyone could, might surely plead an exemption from this universal corruption, yet confesses that “he was shaped in iniquity, and that in sin his mother conceived him.”
0.27	And, to mention only one more text, as immediately applicable to the present purpose, St. Paul, in his epistle to the Romans, says that “Death came upon all men through the disobedience of one, namely, of Adam, even upon those (that is, little children) who had not sinned after the likeness of Adam’s transgression”; who had not been guilty of actual sin, and therefore could not have been punished with temporal death (which came into the world, as this same apostle tells us elsewhere, only by sin) had not the disobedience of our first parents been imputed to them.
0.28	So what has been said on this point seems to be excellently summed up in that article of our church where she declares that “Original sin does not stand in the following of Adam, but it is the fault and corruption of every man that is naturally engendered of the offspring of Adam; whereby man is very far gone from original righteousness, and is of his own nature inclined to evil, so that the flesh always desires what is contrary to the spirit; and therefore in every person born into this world it deserves God’s wrath and damnation.”
0.29	I have been more detailed in treating this point because it is the very foundation of the Christian religion: for I am truly persuaded that it is nothing but a lack of being well grounded in the doctrine of original sin, and of the helpless—indeed, I may say, damnable—condition in which each of us comes into the world, that makes so many unbelievers oppose, and so many who call themselves Christians so very lukewarm in their love and affection toward Jesus Christ.
0.30	It is this, and I could almost say this alone, that makes unbelief abound among us as much as it does.
0.31	For, alas, we are mistaken if we imagine that men now become or remain unbelievers, and set up corrupted reason in opposition to divine revelation, merely for lack of evidence (for I believe it might easily be proved that a modern unbeliever is the most credulous creature living); no, it is only the lack of a humble mind, of a sense of their original depravity, and of a willingness to acknowledge themselves so depraved, that makes them so obstinately shut their eyes against the light of the glorious gospel of Christ.
0.32	Whereas, on the contrary, if they were but once cut to the heart with a due and lively sense of their natural corruption and liability to condemnation, we would no longer have them scoffing at divine revelation and regarding it as an idle tale; but they would cry out with the trembling jailer, “What shall I do to be saved?”
0.33	It was an error on this fundamental point that made so many resist the evidence which the Son of God himself gave of his divine mission when he dwelt among us.
0.34	Every word he spoke, every action he did, every miracle he worked, proved that he came from God.
0.35	Why then did so many harden their hearts and refuse to believe his report?
0.36	Why, he himself tells us: “They will not come to me that they may have life.” They will obstinately hold out against the means God had appointed for their salvation. And St. Paul tells us “that if the gospel is hidden, it is hidden to those who are lost, in whom the god of this world has blinded the eyes of those who do not believe, lest the light of the glorious gospel of Christ, who is the image of God, should shine on them.”
0.37	2 Cor. 4:3–4.
0.38	If it is asked, how does it agree with the divine goodness to impute the guilt of one man’s sin to an innocent posterity?
0.39	I should think it sufficient to use the apostle’s words: “No, but, O man, who are you to reply against God?
0.40	Shall the thing formed say to him who formed it, Why have you made me like this?”
0.41	But to give a more direct reply: people would do well to consider that in the first covenant God made with man, Adam acted as a public person, as the common representative of all mankind, and consequently we must stand or fall with him.
0.42	Had he continued in his obedience and not eaten the forbidden fruit, the benefits of that obedience would doubtless have been imputed to us; but since he did not persist in it, but broke the covenant made with him, and with us in him, who dares charge the righteous Judge of all the earth with injustice for imputing that to us also? I proceed,
0.43	Second, to prove that we stand in need of being justified on account of the sin of our lives.
0.44	That God, since he made man, has a right to demand his obedience is, I suppose, a truth no one will deny; that he has also given us both a natural and a written law, by which we are to be judged, cannot be questioned by anyone who believes St. Paul’s epistle to the Romans to be of divine authority: for in it we are told of a law written in the heart, and a law given by Moses; and that each of us has broken these laws is all too evident from our sad and frequent experience.
0.45	Accordingly, the Holy Scriptures tell us that “there is no man who lives and does not sin”; that “in many things we all offend”; that “if we say we have no sin, we deceive ourselves”; and the like.
0.46	And if we are thus offenders against God, it follows that we stand in need of forgiveness for so offending him—unless we suppose that God enacts laws and at the same time does not care whether they are obeyed or not; which is as absurd as to suppose that a prince should establish laws for the proper government of his country, and yet let every violator of them go unpunished.
0.47	But God has not dealt so foolishly with his creatures. No, as he gave us a law, he demands our obedience to that law, and has bound us to obey it universally and perseveringly, under no lesser penalty than incurring his curse and eternal death for every breach of it; for thus the Scripture speaks: “Cursed is he who does not continue in all things that are written in the law, to do them”; as the Scripture also says in another place, “The soul who sins, it shall die.”
0.48	Now it has already been proved that we have all sinned; and therefore, unless some means can be found to satisfy God’s justice, we must perish eternally.
0.49	Let us then stand still a while, and see in what a deplorable condition each of us comes into the world, and continues, until we are transferred into a state of grace.
0.50	For surely nothing more deplorable can well be imagined than to be born under the curse of God; to be charged with original guilt; and not only so, but to be convicted as actual breakers of God’s law, the least breach of which justly deserves eternal damnation.
0.51	Surely this can be only a melancholy prospect in which to view ourselves, and it must set us to devising some means by which we may satisfy and appease our offended Judge.
0.52	But what must those means be?
0.53	Shall we repent? Alas! there is not one word of repentance mentioned in the first covenant: “The day that you eat of it, you shall surely die.”
0.54	So that, if God is true, unless some way is found to satisfy divine justice, we must perish; and there is no room left for us to expect a change of mind in God, though we should seek it with tears.
0.55	Well then, if repentance will not do, shall we plead the law of works?
0.56	Alas! “By the law no man living shall be justified: for by the law comes the knowledge of sin.”
0.57	It is the law that convicts and condemns, and therefore it can by no means justify us; and “all our righteousnesses (says the prophet) are only like filthy rags.”
0.58	With what then shall we come before the Lord, and bow down before the most high God?
0.59	Shall we come before him with calves a year old, with thousands of rams, or ten thousands of rivers of oil?
0.60	Alas! God has shown you, O man, that this will not avail; for he has declared, “I will take no bull out of your house, nor male goat out of your fold: for all the beasts of the forests are mine, and so are the cattle on a thousand hills.”
0.61	Will the Lord then be pleased to accept our firstborn for our transgression, the fruit of our bodies for the sin of our souls?
0.62	Even this will not purchase our pardon, for he has declared that “the children shall not bear the iniquities of their parents.”
0.63	Besides, they are sinners, and therefore, being under the same condemnation, they stand in need of forgiveness just as much as we do.
0.64	They are impure; and will the Lord accept the blind and the lame for sacrifice?
0.65	Shall some angel then, or archangel, undertake to fulfill the covenant which we have broken, and make atonement for us?
0.66	Alas! they are only creatures, though creatures of the highest order; and therefore they are obliged to obey God as well as we are; and after they have done all, they must say they have done no more than what was their duty to do.
0.67	And supposing it were possible for them to die, yet how could the death of a finite creature satisfy an infinitely offended justice?
0.68	O wretched men that we are!
0.69	Who shall deliver us?
0.70	I thank God, our Lord Jesus Christ.
0.71	This naturally leads me to the
0.72	Third thing proposed, which was to endeavor to prove that there is no possibility of obtaining this justification, which we so greatly need, except by the all-perfect obedience and precious death of Jesus Christ: “But you are justified in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ.”
0.73	But since this has been proved to some extent by what was said under the previous head, where I have shown that neither our repentance, righteousness, nor sacrifice—no, not even the obedience and death of angels themselves—could possibly procure justification for us, nothing remains for me to do under this head but to show that Jesus Christ has procured it for us.
0.74	And here I shall still turn “to the law and to the testimony.”
0.75	For after all the most subtle disputes on either side, nothing but the living oracles of God can give us any satisfaction on this momentous point, it being such an inconceivable mystery that the eternal, only begotten Son of God should die for sinful man, that we would not have dared so much as to think of it, had not God revealed it in his holy word.
0.76	It is true, reason may show us the wound, but only revelation can lead us to the means of our cure.
0.77	And though the method God has been pleased to take to make us happy may be a stumbling block to the unbeliever, and foolishness to the opinionated wise man and disputer of this world, yet wisdom—that is, the dispensation of our redemption—will be justified, approved, and submitted to by all her truly wise and holy children, by every sincere and upright Christian.
0.78	But to come more directly to the point before us.
0.79	Two things, as was observed before, we needed in order to be at peace with God:
0.80	1. To be freed from the guilt of the sin of our nature.
0.81	2. From the sin of our lives.
0.82	And both of these (thanks be to God for this unspeakable gift) are secured to believers by the obedience and death of Jesus Christ.
0.83	For what does the Scripture say?
0.84	1. As to the first, it tells us that “as by the disobedience of one man (or by one transgression, namely, that of Adam) many were made sinners, so by the obedience of one, Jesus Christ (therein including his passive as well as his active obedience), many were made righteous.”
0.85	And again, “As by the disobedience of one man judgment came upon all men to condemnation”—that is, all men were condemned by having Adam’s sin imputed to them—“so by the obedience of one, that is, Jesus Christ, the free gift of pardon and peace came upon all men (all sorts of men) to justification of life.”
0.86	I say all sorts of men; for the apostle in this chapter is only drawing a parallel between the first and the second Adam in this respect, that they both acted as representatives; and as the posterity of Adam had his sin imputed to them, so those for whom Christ died, and whose representative he is, shall have his merits imputed to them also.
0.87	Whoever runs the parallel further in order to prove universal redemption (whatever arguments they may draw for the proof of it from other passages of Scripture)—if they would draw one from this passage for that purpose, I think they stretch their line of interpretation beyond the limits of Scripture.
0.88	2. Pardon for the sin of our lives was another thing which we needed to have secured to us before we could be at peace with God.
0.89	And this, the Holy Scriptures tell us, is abundantly done by the death of Jesus Christ.
0.90	The evangelical prophet foretold that the promised Redeemer would be “wounded for our transgressions, and bruised for our iniquities; that the chastisement of our peace would be upon him; and that by his stripes we would be healed,” Isaiah 53:6.
0.91	The angels at his birth said that he would “save his people from their sins.”
0.92	And St. Paul declares that “this is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners.”
0.93	And here in the words of the text: “Such (or, as I observed before, these things) were some of you; but you are washed, etc.” And again: “Jesus Christ is the end of the law for righteousness to everyone who believes.”
0.94	And to show us that none but Jesus Christ can do all this, the apostle St. Peter says, “Nor is there salvation in any other; for there is no other name under heaven given among men by which we must be saved, but the name of Jesus Christ.”
0.95	How God will be pleased to deal with the Gentiles, who still sit in darkness and under the shadow of death, and on whom the sun of righteousness has never yet risen, is not for us to inquire.
0.96	“What have we to do with judging those who are outside?”
0.97	To God’s mercy let us commend them, and wait for the solution of this and every other difficult point until the great day of accounts, when all God’s dispensations, both of providence and of grace, will be fully cleared up by methods as yet unknown to us, because unrevealed.
0.98	However, this we know: that the Judge of all the earth will most assuredly do right.
0.99	But it is time for me to draw to a conclusion.
0.100	I have now, brothers, by the blessing of God, spoken on the words of the text in the method I proposed.
0.101	Many useful inferences might be drawn from what has been delivered; but since I have detained you, I fear, too long already, permit me only to make a reflection or two on what has been said, and I am done.
0.102	If, then, we are freely justified by the death and obedience of Jesus Christ, let us pause here a while; and as we have already reflected on the misery of a fallen soul, let us now turn aside and see the happiness of the believing soul.
0.103	But alas! how lost I am in the thought that God the Father, when we were in a state of enmity and rebellion against him, should nevertheless yearn in his heart toward us, his fallen, his apostate creatures; and, because nothing but an infinite ransom could satisfy an infinitely offended justice, should send his only and dear Son Jesus Christ (who is God, blessed forever, and who had lain in his bosom from all eternity) to fulfill the covenant of works, and to die a cursed, painful, shameful death for us and for our salvation! Who can keep from crying out at the consideration of this mystery of godliness?
0.104	“Oh, the depth of the riches of God’s love” to us, his wretched, miserable, and undone creatures!
0.105	“How unsearchable is his mercy, and his ways past finding out!”
0.106	Now we know in truth, O God, that you have loved us, “since you have not withheld your Son, your only Son Jesus Christ,” from thus doing and dying for us.
0.107	But as we admire the Father in sending, let us likewise humbly and thankfully adore the Son in coming, when sent to die for man.
0.108	But oh! what thoughts can conceive, what words express, the infinite greatness of that unparalleled love which moved the Son of God to come down from the mansions of his Father’s glory to obey and die for sinful man!
0.109	The Jews, when he merely shed a tear at poor Lazarus’ funeral, said, “See how he loved him.”
0.110	How much more justly, then, may we cry out, See how he loved us!
0.111	When he not only fulfilled the whole moral law, but did not spare to shed his own most precious blood for us.
0.112	And can any poor, truly convicted sinner despair of mercy after this?
0.113	What, can they see their Savior hanging on a tree, with arms stretched out ready to embrace them, and yet, when they truly believe in him, doubt of finding acceptance with him?
0.114	No, away with all such dishonoring, despairing thoughts.
0.115	Look at his hands, bored through with pins of iron; look at his side, pierced with a cruel spear to let loose the floodgates of his blood and open a fountain for sin and for all uncleanness; and then despair of mercy if you can!
0.116	No, only believe in him, and then, though you have crucified him afresh, he will abundantly pardon you: “though your sins are as scarlet, yet they shall be as wool; though deeper than crimson, yet they shall be whiter than snow.”
0.117	Which may God of his infinite mercy grant, etc.
