0.1	Eccles. 4:9–12 — “Two are better than one, because they have a good reward for their labor.
0.2	For if they fall, the one will lift up his fellow; but woe to him who is alone when he falls, for he has no other to help him up.
0.3	Again, if two lie together, then they have heat; but how can one be warm alone?
0.4	And if one prevails against him, two shall withstand him; and a threefold cord is not quickly broken.”
0.5	Among the many reasons that may be given for the sad decline of true Christianity, perhaps our neglect to assemble ourselves together in religious societies may not be one of the least.
0.6	So that I may therefore do my part toward promoting so excellent a means of piety, I have chosen a passage of Scripture drawn from the experience of the wisest of men, which, when somewhat enlarged upon and illustrated, will fully serve my present purpose; that purpose being to show, in the best manner I can, the necessity and benefits of society in general, and of religious society in particular.
0.7	“Two are better than one,” and so on.
0.8	From these words I shall take occasion to prove,
0.9	First, the truth of the wise man's assertion, “Two are better than one,” and that with reference to society in general, and religious society in particular.
0.10	Secondly, to give some reasons why two are better than one, especially as to the last point.
0.11	1. Because men can raise one another up when they happen to slip: “For if they fall, the one will lift up his fellow.”
0.12	2. Because they can impart heat to each other: “Again, if two lie together, then they have heat; but how can one be warm alone?”
0.13	3. Because they can protect each other from those who oppose them: “And if one prevails against him, two shall withstand him; and a threefold cord is not quickly broken.” From this,
0.14	Thirdly, I shall take occasion to show the duty that rests upon every member of a religious society.
0.15	And fourthly, I shall draw an inference or two from what may be said, and then conclude with a word or two of exhortation.
0.16	First, I am to prove the truth of the wise man's assertion that “two are better than one,” and that with reference to society in general, and religious societies in particular.
0.17	And how can this be done better than by showing that it is absolutely necessary for the welfare of both the bodies and the souls of men?
0.18	Indeed, if we look upon man as he came out of the hands of his Maker, we imagine him to be perfect, complete, lacking nothing.
0.19	But God, whose thoughts are not as our thoughts, saw something still missing to make Adam happy.
0.20	And what was that?
0.21	Why, a helper suitable for him.
0.22	For thus the Scripture speaks: “And the Lord God said, It is not good that the man should be alone; I will make a helper suitable for him.”
0.23	Observe, God said, “It is not good,” thereby implying that the creation would have been imperfect in some sense unless a suitable helper was found for Adam.
0.24	And if this was the case of man before the fall, if a helper was fitting for him in a state of perfection, then surely since the fall—when we come naked and helpless out of our mother's womb, when our needs increase with our years, and we can scarcely survive a day without the mutual assistance of one another—well may we say, “It is not good for man to be alone.”
0.25	Society, then, as we see, is absolutely necessary with respect to our bodily and personal needs.
0.26	If we carry our view further and consider mankind as divided into different cities, countries, and nations, its necessity will appear yet more evident.
0.27	For how can communities be maintained, or commerce carried on, without society?
0.28	Certainly not at all, since Providence seems wisely to have assigned a particular product to almost every particular country, on purpose, as it were, to oblige us to be social; and has so admirably joined the parts of the whole body of mankind together “that the eye cannot say to the hand, I have no need of you; nor again the hand to the foot, I have no need of you.”
0.29	Many other instances might be given of the necessity of society with reference to our bodily, personal, and national needs.
0.30	But what are all these, when weighed in the balance of the sanctuary, in comparison with the infinitely greater need of it with respect to the soul?
0.31	It was chiefly with regard to this better part, no doubt, that God said, “It is not good for the man to be alone.”
0.32	For let us suppose Adam to be as happy as can be, placed as lord of the creation in the paradise of God, and spending all his hours in adoring and praising the blessed Author of his being; yet, since his soul was the very copy of the divine nature, whose particular property it is to be communicative, he could not, apart from the divine all-sufficiency, be completely happy, because he was alone and had no one with whom to share himself, nor even be content in paradise, for lack of a partner in his joys.
0.33	God knew this, and therefore said, “It is not good that the man should be alone; I will make a helper suitable for him.”
0.34	And though this proved a fatal means of his fall, yet that was not owing to any natural consequence of society, but partly to that cursed apostate who craftily lies in wait to deceive, and partly to Adam's own folly in choosing to be miserable with one he loved rather than trust God to raise up another wife for him.
0.35	If indeed we reflect on the close fellowship our first parent could carry on with heaven in a state of innocence, we shall be inclined to think that he had as little need of society for his soul as we earlier supposed him to have for his body.
0.36	But still, since God and the holy angels were so far above him on the one hand, and the beasts so far beneath him on the other, there was nothing like having someone to converse with who was “bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh.”
0.37	Man, then, as we see, could not be fully happy even in paradise without a companion of his own kind, much less now that he is driven out.
0.38	For let us view him a little in his natural state now, since the fall, as “having his understanding darkened, his mind alienated from the life of God”; as no more able to see the way in which he should go than a blind man is able to describe the sun; and that, notwithstanding this, he must receive his sight before he can see God; and that if he never sees him, he can never be happy.
0.39	Let us view him in this light (or rather, this darkness), and deny the necessity of society if we can.
0.40	A divine revelation, we find, is absolutely necessary, since by nature we are as unable to know our duty as we are to do it.
0.41	And how shall we learn unless someone teaches us?
0.42	But if God were to do this himself, how could we do anything but, like Moses, exceedingly quake and fear?
0.43	Nor would the ministry of angels in this matter be without too much terror.
0.44	It is necessary, therefore (at least God's dealings with us have shown it to be so), that we should be drawn with the cords of a man.
0.45	And that, a divine revelation being granted, we should use one another's assistance, under God, to instruct each other in the knowledge, and to exhort one another to the practice, of those things which belong to our everlasting peace.
0.46	This is undoubtedly the great purpose of society intended by God since the fall, and a strong argument it is why “two are better than one,” and why we should “not forsake the assembling of ourselves together.”
0.47	But further, let us consider ourselves as Christians, as having this natural veil in some measure taken from our eyes by the help of God's Holy Spirit, and so enabled to see what he requires of us.
0.48	Let us suppose that we have in some degree tasted the good word of life, and have felt the powers of the world to come influencing and molding our souls into a religious disposition; that we are fully and heartily convinced that we are soldiers enlisted under the banner of Christ, and that we proclaimed open war at our baptism against the world, the flesh, and the devil, and have perhaps frequently renewed our pledge to do so by partaking of the Lord's Supper; that we are surrounded by millions of foes without and infected with a legion of enemies within; that we are commanded to shine as lights in the world, in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation; that we are traveling toward a long eternity, and need every imaginable help to show us the way and encourage us on our journey there.
0.49	Let us, I say, reflect on all this, and then how shall each of us cry out, brethren, what a necessary thing it is to meet together in religious societies?
0.50	The early Christians were fully aware of this, and therefore we find them continually keeping up fellowship with one another; for what does the Scripture say?
0.51	They continued steadfastly in the apostles' doctrine and fellowship, Acts 2:42.
0.52	Peter and John were no sooner dismissed by the great council than they hurried away to their companions.
0.53	“And being set at liberty, they came to their own people and told them all these things which the high priest had said to them,” Acts 4:23.
0.54	Paul, as soon as he was converted, “stayed three days with the disciples who were at Damascus.”
0.55	Acts 9:19. And Peter afterward, when released from prison, immediately goes to the house of Mary, where there were “great multitudes assembled, praying,” Acts 12:12.
0.56	And it is reported of the Christians in later ages that they used to assemble together before daylight to sing a psalm to Christ as God.
0.57	So precious was the Communion of Saints in those days.
0.58	If it is asked, what advantages shall we reap from such a practice now?
0.59	I answer, much in every way.
0.60	“Two are better than one, because they have a good reward for their labor; for if they fall, the one will lift up his fellow; but woe to him who is alone when he falls, for he has no other to help him up.
0.61	Again, if two lie together, then they have heat; but how can one be warm alone?
0.62	And if one prevails against him, two shall withstand him; and a threefold cord is not quickly broken.”
0.63	This leads me directly to my second general head, under which I was to give some reasons why “two are better than one,” especially in religious society.
0.64	1. Since man in his present condition cannot always stand upright, but because of the frailty of his nature cannot help but fall, one outstanding reason why two are better than one—or, in other words, one great advantage of religious society—is “that when they fall, the one will lift up his fellow.”
0.65	And an excellent reason this is indeed!
0.66	For alas! When we reflect how prone we are to be drawn into error in our judgments and into vice in our practice, and how unable, or at least how very unwilling, we are to detect or correct our own failings; when we consider how ready the world is to flatter us in our faults, and how few there are kind enough to tell us the truth, what a priceless privilege it must be to have a company of true, judicious, wholehearted friends about us, continually watching over our souls, to inform us where we have fallen, and to warn us not to fall again in the future!
0.67	Surely it is such a privilege that (to use the words of an eminent Christian) we shall never know its value until we come to glory.
0.68	But this is not all; for even supposing that we could always stand upright, yet whoever reflects on the difficulties of religion in general, and on his own tendency to lukewarmness and indifference in particular, will find that he must be zealous as well as steady if he ever expects to enter the kingdom of heaven.
0.69	Here, then, the wise man points out to us another excellent reason why two are better than one:
0.70	“Again, if two lie together, then they have heat; but how can one be warm alone?”
0.71	Which was the next thing to be considered.
0.72	2. A second reason why two are better than one is that they can impart heat to each other.
0.73	It is an observation no less true than common, that burning coals, if placed apart, soon go out, but if heaped together, quicken and enliven each other and give a lasting heat.
0.74	The same holds true in the case now before us.
0.75	If Christians kindled by the grace of God unite, they will quicken and enliven each other; but if they separate and keep apart, it is no wonder if they soon grow cool or lukewarm.
0.76	If two or three meet together in Christ's name, they will have heat; but how can one be warm alone?
0.77	Observe: “How can one be warm alone?”
0.78	The wise man's expressing himself in the form of a question implies an impossibility, or at least a very great difficulty, of being warm in religion without company, where company may be had.
0.79	See here, then, another excellent benefit flowing from religious society: it will keep us zealous, as well as steady, in the way of godliness.
0.80	But let me illustrate this a little further by a comparison or two.
0.81	Let us look upon ourselves (as was hinted above) as soldiers enlisted under Christ's banner; as going out with “ten thousand to meet one who comes against us with twenty thousand”; as persons who are to “wrestle not only with flesh and blood, but against principalities, against powers, and spiritual wickedness in high places.”
0.82	And then tell me, all you who fear God, whether it is not an invaluable privilege to have a company of fellow soldiers continually about us, encouraging and exhorting each other to stand our ground, to keep our ranks, and manfully to follow the captain of our salvation, even though it be through a sea of blood?
0.83	Let us consider ourselves in another light mentioned before, as persons traveling toward a long eternity; as rescued in some measure by the free grace of God from our natural Egyptian bondage, and marching under the leadership of our spiritual Joshua through the wilderness of this world to the land of our heavenly Canaan.
0.84	Let us further reflect how inclined we are to be startled at every difficulty, to cry, “There are lions!
0.85	There are lions in the way!
0.86	There are the sons of Anak” to be grappled with before we can possess the promised land.
0.87	How prone we are, like Lot's wife, to look longingly back on our spiritual Sodom, or, like the foolish Israelites, to long again for the flesh-pots of Egypt, and to return to our former natural state of bondage and slavery.
0.88	Consider this, my brethren, and see what a blessed privilege it will be to have a company of true Israelites about us, always reminding us of the folly of any such cowardly intention, and of the unbearable misery we shall run into if we fall even the least short of the promised land.
0.89	More might be said on this point, if the limits of a discourse of this nature did not oblige me to hasten on,
0.90	3. To give a third reason, mentioned by the wise man in the text, why two are better than one: because they can protect each other from enemies without.
0.91	“And if one prevails against him, yet two shall withstand him; and a threefold cord is not quickly broken.”
0.92	Up to now we have considered the advantages of religious societies as a great safeguard against falling (at least falling dangerously) into sin and lukewarmness, and that, too, through our own corruptions.
0.93	But what does the wise son of Sirach say?
0.94	“My son, when you come to serve the Lord, prepare your soul for temptation”; and that not only from inward but from outward foes, particularly from those two great adversaries, the world and the devil; for no sooner will your eye be turned heavenward than the former will immediately be drawing it another way, telling you that you need not be singular in order to be religious, that you may be a Christian without going so far out of the common road.
0.95	Nor will the devil be lacking in his crafty insinuations or ungodly suggestions to divert or frighten you from pressing forward, “that you may lay hold on the crown of life.”
0.96	And if he cannot prevail this way, he will try another; and in order to make his temptation less easily detected, but at the same time more successful, he will perhaps employ some of your nearest relatives or most powerful friends (as he set Peter on our blessed Master), who will always be urging you to spare yourself, telling you that you need not take such pains, that it is not so difficult a matter to get to heaven as some people would make it, nor the way so narrow as others imagine it to be.
0.97	But see here the advantage of religious company; for supposing you find yourself thus surrounded on every side, and unable to withstand such dreadful (though seemingly friendly) counsels, hurry away to your companions, and they will teach you a truer and better lesson: they will tell you that you must be singular if you would be religious; that it is as impossible for a Christian to be hidden as for a city set upon a hill; that if you would be an almost Christian (and you might as well be none at all), you may live in the same idle, indifferent manner as you see most other people do; but if you would be not only almost but altogether a Christian, they will inform you that you must go a great deal further; that you must not only faintly seek, but “earnestly strive to enter in at the narrow gate”; that there is but one way to heaven now, as formerly, namely, through the narrow passage of a sound conversion; and that in order to bring about this mighty work, you must undergo a constant but necessary discipline of fasting, watching, and prayer.
0.98	And therefore the only reason why those friends give you such advice is that they are not willing to take such pains themselves; or, as our Savior told Peter on a similar occasion, because they “do not relish the things that are of God, but the things that are of men.”
0.99	This, then, is another excellent blessing arising from religious society: that friends can thereby protect each other from those who oppose them.
0.100	The devil is fully aware of this, and therefore he has always done his utmost to suppress and put a stop to the communion of saints.
0.101	This was his grand device at the first planting of the gospel: to persecute those who professed it, in order to separate them.
0.102	And though God, as he always will, overruled this for the better, yet it shows what hostility he has against Christians assembling themselves together.
0.103	Nor has he yet given up his old stratagem; it being his usual way to entice us off by ourselves in order to tempt us, where, being without one another's help, he hopes to lead us captive at his will.
0.104	But, on the contrary, knowing that his own interest is strengthened by society, he would first persuade us to neglect the communion of saints, and then bid us “stand in the way of sinners,” hoping thereby to bring us into the seat of the scornful.
0.105	Judas and Peter are sad examples of this.
0.106	The former had no sooner left his company at supper than he went out and betrayed his Master; and the dismal downfall of the latter, when he ventured himself among a company of enemies, plainly shows us what the devil will attempt when he gets us by ourselves.
0.107	Had Peter kept to his own company, he might have kept his integrity; but a single cord, alas! how quickly was it broken?
0.108	Our blessed Savior knew this full well, and therefore it is very noteworthy that he always sent out his disciples “two by two.”
0.109	And now, after so many advantages to be reaped from religious society, may we not very justly cry out with the wise man in my text, “Woe to him who is alone; for when he falls, he has no other to lift him up!”
0.110	When he is cold, he has no friend to warm him; when he is attacked, he has no second to help him withstand his enemy.
0.111	III. I now come to my third general head, under which were to be shown the several duties that rest upon every member of a religious society as such, which are three:
0.112	1. Mutual reproof; 2.
0.113	Mutual exhortation; 3. Mutually assisting and defending each other.
0.114	1. Mutual reproof. “Two are better than one; for when they fall, the one will lift up his fellow.”
0.115	Now, reproof may be taken either in a broader sense, and then it signifies our raising up a brother by the gentlest means when he falls into sin and error; or in a narrower meaning, as reaching no further than those failings which unavoidably happen to the holiest men living.
0.116	The wise man in the text supposes all of us subject to both: “For when they fall (thereby implying that each of us may fall), the one will lift up his fellow.”
0.117	From this we may infer that “when any brother is overtaken in a fault, he who is spiritual (that is, regenerate, and knowing the corruption and weakness of human nature) ought to restore such a one in a spirit of meekness.”
0.118	And why he should do so, the apostle adds a reason: “considering yourself, lest you also be tempted”; that is, considering your own frailty, lest you also fall by the same temptation.
0.119	We are all frail, unstable creatures; and it is owing solely to the free grace and good providence of God that we do not run into the same excess of riot as other men.
0.120	Every offending brother, therefore, has a claim on our pity rather than our resentment; and each member should strive to be the most forward, as well as the most gentle, in restoring him to his former state.
0.121	But supposing a person has not been overtaken, but has fallen willfully into a crime; yet who are you, that you deny forgiveness to your offending brother?
0.122	“Let him who stands take heed lest he fall.”
0.123	Take the holy apostles, brethren, as eminent examples to learn from how you ought to behave in this matter.
0.124	Consider how quickly they gave the right hand of fellowship to Peter, who had so willfully denied his Master; for we find John and him together only two days later, John 20:2.
0.125	And in verse 19 we find him assembled with the rest.
0.126	So soon did they forgive, so soon did they associate with their sinful yet repentant brother.
0.127	“Let us go and do likewise.”
0.128	But there is another kind of reproof that rests upon every member of a religious society; namely, a gentle rebuke for some failing or other which, though not actually sinful, may yet become an occasion of sin.
0.129	This indeed seems an easier point, but will perhaps be found a more difficult one than the former; for when a person has really sinned, he cannot but admit that his brethren's reproof is just; whereas when it is only for some small misconduct, the pride that is in our natures will scarcely allow us to bear (endure, tolerate) it.
0.130	But however unpleasant this pill may be to our brother, yet if we have any concern for his welfare, it must be administered by some friendly hand or other.
0.131	By all means, then, let it be applied; only, like a skillful physician, gild over the unpleasant pill, and endeavor, if possible, to deceive your brother into health and soundness.
0.132	“Let all bitterness, and wrath, and malice, and evil speaking be put away” from it.
0.133	Let the patient know that his recovery is the only thing aimed at, and that you take no delight in grieving your brother without cause; then you cannot fail to succeed.
0.134	2. Mutual exhortation is the second duty arising from the words of the text:
0.135	“Again, if two lie together, then they have heat.”
0.136	Observe, the wise man supposes it to be as impossible for religious persons to meet together and not be the warmer for each other's company, as for two persons to lie in the same bed and yet freeze with cold.
0.137	But now, how is it possible to communicate heat to each other without mutually stirring up the gift of God which is in us by brotherly exhortation?
0.138	Let every member of a religious society, then, write that zealous apostle's advice on the tablets of his heart: “See that you exhort and stir up one another to love and to good works; and so much the more as you see the day of the Lord approaching.”
0.139	Believe me, brethren, we need exhortation to rouse our sleepy souls, to set us on our guard against the temptations of the world, the flesh, and the devil; to move us to deny ourselves, to take up our crosses, and to follow our blessed Master and the glorious company of saints and martyrs, “who through faith have fought the good fight, and have gone before us to inherit the promises.”
0.140	A third part, therefore, of the time during which a religious society meets seems necessary to be spent in this important duty; for what does it avail to have our understandings enlightened by devout reading, unless our wills are at the same time inclined and inflamed by mutual exhortation to put it into practice?
0.141	Add also that this is the best way both to receive and to impart light, and the only means of preserving and increasing that warmth and heat which each person first brought with him; God so ordering this, as all other spiritual gifts, that “to him who has, that is, improves and shares what he has, more shall be given; but from him who has not, or does not improve the heat he has, shall be taken away even that which he seemed to have.”
0.142	So needful, so essentially necessary, is exhortation to the good of society.
0.143	3. Thirdly, the text points out another duty that rests upon every member of a religious society: to defend each other from those who oppose them.
0.144	“And if one prevails against him, yet two shall withstand him; and a threefold cord is not quickly broken.”
0.145	Here the wise man takes it for granted that offenses will come, yes, and that they may prevail too.
0.146	And this is no more than our blessed Master told us long ago.
0.147	Not, indeed, that there is anything in Christianity itself that has the least tendency to give rise to or promote such offenses. No; on the contrary, it breathes nothing but unity and love.
0.148	But so it is that ever since the fatal sentence pronounced by God after our first parents' fall, “I will put enmity between your seed and her seed,” he who is born after the flesh, the unregenerate, unconverted sinner, has in all ages “persecuted him who is born after the Spirit”; and so it always will be.
0.149	Accordingly, we find an early proof of this given in the instances of Cain and Abel, of Ishmael and Isaac, and of Jacob and Esau.
0.150	And indeed, the whole Bible contains little else but a history of the great and continued opposition between the children of this world and the children of God.
0.151	The first Christians were remarkable examples of this; and though those troublesome times, blessed be God, are now over, yet the apostle has laid it down as a general rule, and all who are sincere prove its truth by experience, that “those who will live godly in Christ Jesus must (to the end of the world, in some degree or other) suffer persecution.”
0.152	So that this may not make us desert our blessed Master's cause, every member should therefore unite their forces in order to stand against it.
0.153	And to accomplish this the better, each would do well from time to time to share his experiences, grievances, and temptations, and to beg his companions (first asking God's help, without which all is nothing) to give reproof, exhortation, or comfort, as his case requires; so that “if one cannot prevail against it, yet two shall withstand it; and a threefold (much less a manifold) cord will not be quickly broken.”
0.154	IV. But it is time for me to proceed to the fourth general point proposed: to draw an inference or two from what has been said.
0.155	1. And first, if “two are better than one,” and the advantages of religious society are so many and so great, then it is the duty of every true Christian to set on foot, establish, and promote, as far as lies in his power, societies of this nature.
0.156	And I believe we may venture to affirm that if ever a spirit of true Christianity is revived in the world, it must be brought about by some such means as this.
0.157	Surely motives cannot be lacking to stir us up to this commendable and necessary undertaking; for, granting that all that has been advanced so far is of no force, yet it seems to me that the single consideration that a great part of our happiness in heaven will consist in the Communion of Saints, or that the interest as well as the piety of those who differ from us is strengthened and supported by nothing more than their frequent meetings—either of these considerations, I say, one would think, should induce us to do our utmost to copy their good example, and to establish a lasting and devout communion of the saints on earth.
0.158	Add to this that we find the kingdom of darkness established daily by such means; and shall not the kingdom of Christ be set up in opposition to it?
0.159	Shall the children of Belial assemble and strengthen each other in wickedness, and shall not the children of God unite and strengthen themselves in piety?
0.160	Shall society upon society be approved for midnight revelry and the promotion of vice, and scarcely one be found intended for the spreading of virtue?
0.161	Be astonished, O heavens, at this!
0.162	2. But this leads me to a second inference; namely, to warn people of the great danger that those are in who, whether by their subscriptions, presence, or approval, promote societies of a nature quite opposite to religion.
0.163	And here I would not be understood to mean only those public gatherings which are clearly designed for nothing else but revelry and banqueting, for lewdness and wantonness, and at which a modest heathen would blush to be present; but also those seemingly innocent entertainments and gatherings which the more polite part of the world is so very fond of and spends so much time in, but which nevertheless keep as many persons from a sense of true religion as intemperance, debauchery, or any other crimes whatever.
0.164	Indeed, while we are in this world we must have proper recreation, to fit us both for the business of our calling and for religion.
0.165	But then, for persons who call themselves Christians, who have solemnly vowed at their baptism to renounce the vanities of this sinful world, who are commanded in Scripture “to abstain from all appearance of evil, and to have their citizenship in heaven”—for such persons as these to support gatherings which (to say nothing worse of them) are vain and trifling, and have a natural tendency to draw our minds away from God, is absurd, ridiculous, and sinful.
0.166	Surely two are not better than one in this case. No; it is to be wished that not one could be found involved in it.
0.167	The sooner we forsake the assembling of ourselves together in such a manner, the better; and it matters not how quickly the cord that holds such societies together (were it a thousandfold) is broken.
0.168	But you, brethren, have not so learned Christ; but, on the contrary, like true disciples of your Lord and Master, you have by the blessing of God (as this evening's solemn gathering abundantly testifies) happily formed yourselves into such societies, which, if duly attended and made good use of, cannot fail to strengthen you in your Christian warfare, and “make you fruitful in every good word and work.”
0.169	What remains for me but, as was proposed, in the first place to close what has been said with a word or two by way of exhortation, and to beseech you, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, to go on in the way you have begun; and by a constant, conscientious attendance at your respective societies, to discourage vice, encourage virtue, and build each other up in the knowledge and fear of God.
0.170	Only permit me to “stir up your pure minds by way of remembrance,” and to exhort you, “if there is any consolation in Christ, any fellowship of the Spirit,” again and again to consider that, as all Christians in general, so all members of religious societies in particular, are in a special manner like houses built upon a hill; and that therefore it greatly concerns you to walk carefully toward those who are outside, and to take heed to yourselves that your conduct in common life is such as befits so open and distinctive a profession of the gospel of Christ; knowing that the eyes of all people are upon you, closely inspecting every circumstance of your behavior, and that every notorious, willful failing of any single member will in some measure bring scandal and dishonor upon your whole fraternity.
0.171	Labor, therefore, my beloved brethren, to let your practice match your profession; and do not think that it will be enough for you to plead at the last day, Lord, have we not assembled ourselves together in your name, and enlivened each other by singing psalms and hymns and spiritual songs?
0.172	For truly, I say to you, notwithstanding this, our blessed Lord will bid you depart from him; yes, you shall receive a great condemnation if, in the midst of these great pretensions, you are found to be workers of iniquity.
0.173	But God forbid that any such evil should befall you; that there should ever be a Judas, a traitor, among such distinguished followers of our common Master.
0.174	No; on the contrary, the excellence of your rule, the regularity of your meetings, and more especially your devout zeal in assembling in such a public and solemn manner so often in the year, persuade me to think that you are willing not merely to seem, but to be in reality, Christians; and that you hope to be found at the last day to be what you would be esteemed now: holy, sincere disciples of a crucified Redeemer.
0.175	Oh, may you always continue so minded!
0.176	And make it your daily, constant endeavor, both by precept and example, to turn all your dealings with others, more especially those of your own societies, into the same most blessed spirit and temper.
0.177	Thus you will adorn the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ in all things; thus you will anticipate the happiness of a future state; and by attending upon and making good use of the communion of saints on earth, you will be made fit to join the communion and fellowship of the spirits of just men made perfect, of the holy angels, yes, of the ever blessed and eternal God in heaven.
0.178	Which may God of his infinite mercy grant through Jesus Christ our Lord; to whom, with the Father and the Holy Spirit, three persons and one God, be ascribed, as is most due, all honor and praise, might, majesty, and dominion, now and forever. Amen.
