0.1	If we ask why there is so little love to be found among Christians, why the very mark by which everyone should know that we are disciples of the holy Jesus is almost banished from the Christian world, we shall find it due, in great measure, to a neglect or superficial performance of that excellent part of prayer, intercession, or imploring the divine grace and mercy on behalf of others.
0.2	Some forget this duty of praying for others because they seldom remember to pray for themselves; and even those who are constant in praying to their Father who is in heaven are often so selfish in their addresses to the throne of grace that they do not enlarge their petitions for the welfare of their fellow Christians as they ought; and so they fall short of attaining that Christian charity, that sincere love for their brothers, which their sacred profession obliges them to aspire to, and without which, though they should give all their goods to feed the poor, and even give their bodies to be burned, it would profit them nothing.
0.3	Since these things are so, I shall from the words of the text (though they were originally intended in a narrower sense) endeavor to show,
0.4	I. First, that it is every Christian's duty to pray for others as well as for himself.
0.5	II. Secondly, whom we ought to pray for, and in what manner we should do it. And,
0.6	III. Thirdly, I shall offer some motives to stir up all Christians to abound in this great duty of intercession.
0.7	I. First, I shall endeavor to show that it is every Christian's duty to pray for others, as well as for himself.
0.8	Now prayer is a duty founded on natural religion; even the heathen never neglected it, though many Christian heathen among us do; and it is so essential to Christianity that you might as reasonably expect to find a living man without breath as a true Christian without the spirit of prayer and supplication.
0.9	Thus, no sooner was St. Paul converted than "behold, he prays," says the Lord Almighty.
0.10	And so it will be with every child of God as soon as he becomes one, for prayer is truly called the natural cry of the newborn soul.
0.11	For in the heart of every true believer there is a heavenly tendency, a divine attraction, which draws him to converse with God as perceptibly as the magnet attracts the needle.
0.12	A deep sense of their own weakness and of Christ's fullness, a strong conviction of their natural corruption and of the necessity of renewing grace, will not let them rest from crying day and night to their Almighty Redeemer, that the divine image, which they lost in Adam, may through his all-powerful mediation, and the sanctifying work of his blessed Spirit, be begun, carried on, and fully perfected both in their souls and bodies.
0.13	So earnest, so persistent are all sincere Christians in praying for themselves; but then, not having so lively, lasting, and deep a sense of the needs of their Christian brothers, they are for the most part too negligent and deficient in their prayers for them.
0.14	Whereas, if the love of God were poured out in our hearts, and if we loved our neighbor in the way in which the Son of God our Savior loved us, and according to his command and example, we could not help being as persistent for their spiritual and temporal welfare as for our own, and as earnestly desiring and striving that others should share in the benefits of the death and passion of Jesus Christ as we ourselves.
0.15	Let no one think that this is an uncommon degree of charity, a high pitch of perfection which not everyone can attain; for if we are all commanded to "love our neighbor (that is, every man) even as ourselves," and even to "lay down our lives for the brothers," then it is the duty of all to pray for their neighbors as much as for themselves, and by every possible act and expression of love and affection toward them, at all times, to show their readiness even to lay down their lives for them, if it should ever please God to call them to it.
0.16	Our blessed Savior, as "he has set us an example, that we should follow his steps" in everything else, has done so more especially in this; for in that divine, that perfect and inimitable prayer (recorded in John 17) which he offered just before his passion, we find only a few petitions for his own welfare, though many for his disciples'; and in that perfect form which he has been pleased to prescribe for us, we are taught to say, not "my," but "our Father," to remind us that whenever we approach the throne of grace, we ought to pray not for ourselves alone, but for all our brothers in Christ.
0.17	Intercession, then, is certainly a duty binding on all Christians.
0.18	II. Whom we are to intercede for, and how this duty is to be performed, is next to be considered.
0.19	1. And first, our intercession must be universal.
0.20	"I desire (says the apostle) that prayers, supplications, and intercessions be made for all men."
0.21	For as God's mercy is over all his works, and as Jesus Christ died to redeem a people out of all nations and languages, so we should pray that "all men may come to the knowledge of the truth and be saved."
0.22	Many precious promises are made in Holy Scripture that the gospel shall be proclaimed through the whole world, that "the earth shall be covered with the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea"; and therefore it is our duty not to confine our petitions to our own nation, but to pray that all those nations who now sit in darkness and in the shadow of death may have the glorious gospel shine out upon them as well as upon us.
0.23	But you do not need anyone to teach you this, since you yourselves are taught by God, and by Jesus Christ himself, to pray that his kingdom may come; part of the meaning of which petition is that "God's ways may be known upon earth, and his saving power among all nations."
0.24	2. Next to praying for all men, we should, according to St. Paul's rule, pray for kings, particularly for our present sovereign King George, and all who are placed in authority under him, that we may lead quiet lives in all godliness and honesty.
0.25	For if we consider how heavy the burden of government is, and how much the welfare of any people depends on the zeal and godly conduct of those who rule over them; if we set before us the many dangers and difficulties to which governors are exposed by their position, and the continual temptations they are under to luxury and self-indulgence, we shall not only pity them but pray for them: that he who preserved Esther, David, and Josiah "unspotted from the world" amid the grandeur of a court, and gave success to their plans, would also preserve them holy and blameless, and prosper all the works of their hands upon them. But
0.26	3. Thirdly, you ought in a more special manner to pray for those whom "the Holy Spirit has made overseers over you."
0.27	This is what St. Paul asks again and again of the churches to which he writes. He says in the text, "Brothers, pray for us"; and again, in his letter to the Ephesians, "praying always, with every kind of supplication; and for me also, that I may open my mouth boldly to declare the mystery of the gospel."
0.28	And in another place, to express his earnestness in this request and the great importance of their prayers for him, he bids the church "strive (or, as the original word signifies, be in agony) together with him in their prayers."
0.29	And surely, if the great St. Paul, that chosen vessel, that favorite of heaven, needed the most persistent prayers of his Christian converts, much more do the ordinary ministers of the gospel stand in need of the intercession of their respective flocks.
0.30	And I must insist on this branch of your duty in a more special manner, because it is a matter of such importance; for no doubt much good is often withheld from many because they neglect to pray for their ministers, good which they would have received had they prayed for them as they ought.
0.31	Not to mention that people often complain of the lack of diligent and faithful pastors.
0.32	But how do they deserve good pastors who will not earnestly pray to God for such?
0.33	If we will not pray to the Lord of the harvest, can it be expected that he will send out laborers into his harvest?
0.34	Besides, what ingratitude it is not to pray for your ministers!
0.35	For shall they watch and labor in the word and doctrine for you and your salvation, and shall you not pray for them in return?
0.36	If anyone bestows favors on your bodies, you think it right, fitting, and your binding duty to pray for them; and shall they not be remembered in your prayers who daily feed and nourish your souls?
0.37	Add to all this that praying for your ministers will be a clear proof that you believe that though Paul plants and Apollos waters, it is God alone who gives the increase.
0.38	And you will also find it the best means you can use to promote your own welfare, because God, in answer to your prayers, may impart a double portion of his Holy Spirit to them, by which they will be qualified to deal out to you larger measures of knowledge in spiritual things, and be enabled more skillfully to divide the word of truth.
0.39	If people would only constantly observe this direction, and when their ministers are praying to God in their name, humbly beseech him to grant all their petitions; or when they are speaking to them in God's name, pray that the Holy Spirit may fall on all those who hear the word, we should find a more visible good effect of their teaching, and a greater mutual love between ministers and their people.
0.40	For ministers' hands would then be held up by the people's intercessions, and the people will never dare to vilify or slander those who are the constant subjects of their prayers.
0.41	4. Next to our ministers, our friends claim a place in our intercessions; but then we should not content ourselves with praying for them in general terms, but suit our prayers to their particular circumstances.
0.42	When Miriam was afflicted by God with leprosy, Moses cried out and said, "Lord, heal her."
0.43	And when the nobleman came to appeal to Jesus Christ on behalf of his child, he said, "Lord, my little daughter is at the point of death; I beg you to come and heal her."
0.44	In the same way, when our friends are in any afflicting circumstances, we should endeavor to pray for them with particular regard to those circumstances.
0.45	For instance, is a friend sick?
0.46	We should pray that, if it is God's good pleasure, it may not lead to death; but if otherwise, that he would give him grace so to bear this visitation that, when this painful life is ended, he may dwell with him in life everlasting.
0.47	Is a friend in doubt about an important matter?
0.48	We should lay his case before God, as Moses did that of the daughters of Zelophehad, and pray that God's Holy Spirit may lead him into all truth and give him all timely direction.
0.49	Is he in need?
0.50	We should pray that his faith may never fail, and that in God's due time he may be relieved.
0.51	And in all other cases we should not pray for our friends only in general terms, but suit our petitions to their particular sufferings and afflictions; for otherwise we may perhaps never ask for the things our friends most need.
0.52	It must be admitted that such a practice will often oblige some to break away from the forms they use; but if we accustom ourselves to it, and have a deep sense of what we are asking for, even the most unlearned will not lack proper words to express themselves.
0.53	We have many noble examples in Holy Scripture of the success of this kind of particular intercession, but none more remarkable than that of Abraham's servant in the book of Genesis, who, being sent to seek a wife for his son Isaac, prayed in a most particular manner on his behalf.
0.54	And the rest of the story tells us how remarkably his prayer was answered.
0.55	And if Christians now prayed for their friends in the same particular manner, and with the same faith, as Abraham's servant did for his master, they would no doubt in many instances receive answers just as visible, and have as much reason to bless God for them as he had. But
0.56	5. As we ought thus to intercede for our friends, so in the same way we must also pray for our enemies.
0.57	"Bless those who curse you (says Jesus Christ), and pray for those who treat you with spite and persecute you."
0.58	This command he enforced in the strongest manner by his own example: in the very agonies and pangs of death he prayed even for his murderers, "Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do!"
0.59	This, it must be admitted, is a difficult duty, yet not impossible for those who have renounced the things of this present life (from an inordinate love of which all enmities arise), and who, knowing the terrible woes pronounced against those who cause Christ's little ones to stumble, can out of real pity and a sense of their danger pray for those through whom such offenses come.
0.60	6. Lastly, and to conclude this head, we should intercede for all who are in any way afflicted in mind, body, or circumstances; for all who desire and stand in need of our prayers; and for all who do not pray for themselves.
0.61	And oh, that all who hear me would set apart some time every day for the proper performance of this most necessary duty!
0.62	To that end,
0.63	I shall now proceed,
0.64	III. To show the advantages, and to offer some considerations to stir you up to the practice of daily intercession. And
0.65	1. First, it will fill your hearts with love for one another.
0.66	He who every day heartily intercedes at the throne of grace for all mankind cannot help being filled, in a short time, with love and charity toward all; and the frequent exercise of his love in this manner will imperceptibly enlarge his heart, and make him a partaker of that exceeding abundance of it which is in Christ Jesus our Lord!
0.67	Envy, malice, revenge, and similar hellish tempers can never long lodge in a gracious intercessor's breast; but he will be filled with joy, peace, meekness, long-suffering, and all the other graces of the Holy Spirit.
0.68	By frequently laying his neighbor's needs before God, he will be touched with a fellow-feeling for them; he will rejoice with those who rejoice, and weep with those who weep.
0.69	Every blessing bestowed on others, instead of stirring up envy in him, will be looked on as an answer to his particular intercession, and will fill his soul with joy inexpressible and full of glory.
0.70	Abound, therefore, in acts of general and particular intercession; and when you hear of your neighbor's faults, instead of relating them to others and exposing them before others, lay them in secret before God, and beg him to correct and amend them.
0.71	When you hear of a notorious sinner, instead of thinking you do well to be angry, beg Jesus Christ to convert him and make him a monument of his free grace; you cannot imagine what a blessed change this practice will make in your heart, and how much you will grow day by day in the spirit of love and meekness toward all mankind!
0.72	But further, to stir you up to the constant practice of this duty of intercession, consider the many examples in Holy Scripture of its power and efficacy.
0.73	Great and excellent things are recorded there as the effects of this divine employment.
0.74	It has stopped plagues, it has opened and shut heaven, and it has often turned away God's fury from his people.
0.75	How was Abimelech's house freed from the disease God sent among them at the intercession of Abraham!
0.76	When "Phinehas stood up and prayed," how soon the plague ceased!
0.77	When Daniel humbled and afflicted his soul, and interceded for the Lord's inheritance, how quickly an angel was dispatched to tell him "his prayer was heard!"
0.78	And, to mention only one more instance, how God acknowledges himself, as it were, overcome by the persistence of Moses when he was interceding for his idolatrous people: "Let me alone," says God!
0.79	This sufficiently shows, I could almost say, the omnipotence of intercession, and how we may, like Jacob, wrestle with God, and by a holy violence prevail both for ourselves and for others.
0.80	And no doubt it is owing to the secret and prevailing intercessions of the few righteous souls who still remain among us that God has yet spared this miserably sinful nation; for if there were not some such faithful ones left, like Moses, to stand in the gap, we should soon be destroyed, even as Sodom was, and reduced to ashes like Gomorrah.
0.81	But to stir you up still further to this exercise of intercession, consider that in all probability it is the frequent employment even of the glorified saints; for though they are delivered from the burden of the flesh, and restored to the glorious liberty of the sons of God, yet since their happiness cannot be perfectly completed until the resurrection of the last day, when all their brothers will be glorified with them, we cannot but think that they are often persistent in beseeching our heavenly Father shortly to complete the number of his elect and to hasten his kingdom.
0.82	And shall not we who are on earth often be engaged in this divine employment together with the glorious company of the spirits of just men made perfect?
0.83	Since our happiness is to consist so much in the communion of saints in the church triumphant above, shall we not often intercede for the church militant here below, and earnestly beg that we may all be one, even as the holy Jesus and his Father are one, that we also may be made perfect in one?
0.84	To provoke you to this great work and labor of love, remember that it is the never-ceasing employment of the holy and highly exalted Jesus himself, who sits at the right hand of God, to hear all our prayers and to make continual intercession for us!
0.85	So that he who is constantly employed in interceding for others is doing on earth what the eternal Son of God is always doing in heaven.
0.86	Imagine, therefore, when you are lifting up holy hands in prayer for one another, that you see the heavens opened, and the Son of God in all his glory, as the great High Priest of your salvation, pleading for you the all-sufficient merit of his sacrifice before the throne of his heavenly Father!
0.87	Join your intercessions, then, with his, and beseech him that through him they may come up as incense, and be received as a sweet fragrance, acceptable in the sight of God!
0.88	This picture in your mind will strengthen your faith, stir up a holy earnestness in your prayers, and make you wrestle with God as Jacob did when he saw him face to face and his life was preserved; as Abraham did when he pleaded for Sodom; and as Jesus Christ himself did when, being in agony, he prayed all the more earnestly the night before his bitter passion.
0.89	And now, brothers, what more shall I say, since you are taught by Jesus Christ himself to abound in love, and in this good work of praying for one another?
0.90	However lowly you may be, though as poor as Lazarus, you will then become benefactors to all mankind; thousands, and twenty times ten thousand, will then be blessed for your sakes!
0.91	And after you have spent a few years in this divine exercise here, you will be carried up to that happy place to which you have so often wished others might be raised, and be exalted to sit at the right hand of our All-powerful, All-prevailing Intercessor in the kingdom of his heavenly Father hereafter.
0.92	However, I must press this upon you now in a special manner, because all of you among whom I have now been preaching will in all probability see me no more; for I am now going away from you (I trust under the guidance of God's most Holy Spirit), not knowing what will befall me; I therefore need your most persistent intercessions, that nothing may move me from my duty, and that I may not "hold even my life dear to myself, so that I may finish my course with joy, and the ministry I have received from the Lord Jesus, to bear witness to the gospel of the grace of God!"
0.93	While I have been here, to the best of my knowledge I have not failed to declare to you the whole will of God; and though my preaching may have been a fragrance of death to death to some, yet I trust it has also been a fragrance of life to life to others; and therefore I earnestly hope that these will not fail to remember me in their prayers.
0.94	As for me, the many undeserved kindnesses I have received from you will not allow me to forget you; out of the deep, therefore, I trust my cry shall come to God; and while the winds and storms are blowing over me, to the Lord I will make my supplication for you.
0.95	For it is only a little while, and "we must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ," where I must give a strict account of the doctrine I have preached, and you of your improvement under it.
0.96	And oh, that I may never be called out as a swift witness against any of those for whose salvation I have sincerely, though too faintly, longed and labored!
0.97	It is true that I have been censured by some as acting from sinister and selfish motives; "but with me it is a small matter to be judged by man's judgment." I hope my eye is single; but I beseech you, brothers, by the mercies of God in Christ Jesus, pray that it may be more so!
0.98	And that I may grow with the increase of grace in the knowledge and love of God through Jesus Christ our Lord.
0.99	And now, brothers, what more shall I say?
0.100	I could wish to continue my discourse much longer, for I can never fully express the desire of my soul toward you!
0.101	Finally, therefore, brothers, "whatever things are holy, whatever things are pure, whatever things are honest, whatever things are of good report; if there is any consolation in Christ, if any fellowship of the Spirit," if there is any hope of our appearing to one another's comfort at the awe-inspiring tribunal of Jesus Christ, "think of the things that you have heard," and of those which your pastors have declared and will yet declare to you; and continue under their ministry to "work out your own salvation with fear and trembling," so that whether I never see you again, or whether it pleases God to bring me back at any time, I may always have the satisfaction of knowing that your conduct is such "as befits the gospel of Christ."
0.102	I almost persuade myself that I could willingly suffer all things, if it might in any way promote the salvation of your precious and immortal souls; and I beseech you, as my last request, "obey those who have rule over you in the Lord," and always be ready to attend their ministry, as it is your binding duty.
0.103	Do not think that I wish to have myself exalted at the expense of another's reputation; but rather think this: not to hold any man's person in too much admiration, but to esteem all your ministers very highly in love, as they justly deserve, for their work's sake.
0.104	And now, "brothers, I commend you to God, and to the word of his grace, which is able to build you up and to give you an inheritance among all those who are sanctified."
0.105	May God reward you for all your works of faith and labors of love, and make you abound more and more in every good word and work toward all men.
0.106	May he truly convert all who have been convicted, and awaken all who are dead in trespasses and sins!
0.107	May he establish all who are wavering!
0.108	And may you all go on from one degree of grace to another, until you arrive at the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ, and so be made fit to stand before that God "in whose presence is the fullness of joy, and at whose right hand there are pleasures forevermore!" Amen! Amen!
