0.248	This promise has been fulfilled in the elect of God, considered collectively, both before and since the coming of our Lord in the flesh; for they may be called the seed of the woman.
0.249	Do not marvel that all who want to live godly in Christ Jesus must suffer persecution.
0.250	In this promise an eternal enmity is put between the seed of the woman and the seed of the serpent, so that those who are born according to the flesh cannot help but persecute those who are born according to the Spirit.
0.251	This enmity showed itself soon after this promise was revealed, in Cain’s bruising the heel of Abel; it continued in the church through all the ages before Christ came in the flesh, as the history of the Bible and the eleventh chapter of Hebrews plainly show.
0.252	It raged exceedingly after our Lord’s ascension; witness the Acts of the Apostles and the History of the Primitive Christians.
0.253	It rages now, and will continue to rage and show itself, to a greater or lesser degree, to the end of time.
0.254	But do not let this dismay us; for in all this the seed of the woman is more than conqueror, and bruises the serpent’s head.
0.255	So it was with the Israelites: the more they were oppressed, the more they increased.
0.256	So it was with the apostles; so it was with their immediate followers.
0.257	So much so that Tertullian compares the church in his time to a mown field: the more often it is cut, the more it grows.
0.258	The blood of the martyrs has always been the seed of the church.
0.259	And I have often sat down with wonder and delight, and admired how God has made the very schemes his enemies devised to hinder his gospel become the most effective means of spreading it.
0.260	The devil has had so little success in persecution that, if I did not know that he and his children, according to this verse, cannot help but persecute, I would think he would count it his strength to sit still.
0.261	What did he gain by persecuting the martyrs in Queen Mary’s time?
0.262	Was not the grace of God exceedingly glorified in sustaining them?
0.263	What did he gain by persecuting the good old Puritans?
0.264	Did it not result in the peopling of New England?
0.265	Or, to come nearer to our own times, what has he gained by putting us out of the synagogues?
0.266	Has not the word of God mightily prevailed since then?
0.267	My dear hearers, you must excuse me for enlarging on this point; God generally fills my soul when I come to this topic.
0.268	I can say with Luther, “If it were not for persecution, I would not understand the Scripture.”
0.269	If Satan should yet be permitted to bruise my heel further, and his servants should thrust me into prison, I do not doubt that even that would only serve to bruise his head more effectively.
0.270	I remember a saying of the Lord Chancellor of that time to the godly Bradford: “You have done more harm,” he said, “by your exhortations in private in prison than you did by preaching before you were put in,” or words to that effect.
0.271	The promise of the text is my daily support: “I will put enmity between your seed and her seed; it shall bruise your head, and you shall bruise his heel.”
0.272	Further, this promise is also fulfilled, not only in the church in general, but in every individual believer in particular.
0.273	In every believer there are two seeds, the seed of the woman and the seed of the serpent: the flesh lusting against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh.
0.274	It is with the believer, when his heart is made alive by grace, as it was with Rebekah when she had conceived Esau and Jacob in her womb: she felt a struggling and began to be uneasy. “If it is so,” she says, “why am I like this?”
0.275	(Gen. 25:22) In the same way grace and nature struggle (if I may speak this way) in the womb of a believer’s heart; but as it was said there, “The older shall serve the younger,” so it is here — grace shall in the end get the better of nature; the seed of the woman shall bruise the serpent’s head.
0.276	Many of you who have believed in Christ may perhaps find some particular corruption still strong, so strong that you are sometimes ready to cry out with David, “I shall one day fall by the hand of Saul.”
0.277	But do not fear; the promise in the text ensures the perseverance and victory of believers over sin, Satan, death, and hell.
0.278	What if indwelling corruption does still remain, and the seed of the serpent bruises your heel by vexing and disturbing your righteous souls?
0.279	Do not fear; though faint, yet pursue; you shall yet bruise the serpent’s head.
0.280	Christ has died for you, and in yet a little while he will send death to destroy the very existence of sin in you.
0.281	This brings me to show the fullest way in which the promise of the text shall be fulfilled, namely, at the final judgment, when the Lord Jesus shall present the elect to his Father without spot or wrinkle or any such thing, glorified in both body and soul.
0.282	Then the seed of the woman shall give the last and fatal blow, in bruising the serpent’s head.
0.283	Satan, the accuser of the brothers, and all his accursed seed shall then be cast out, and never be permitted to disturb the seed of the woman any more.
0.284	Then the righteous shall shine as the sun in the kingdom of their Father, and sit with Christ on thrones in majesty on high.
0.285	Let us, therefore, not be weary of doing good; for we shall reap an eternal harvest of comfort if we do not give up.
0.286	Dare, dare, my dear brothers in Christ, to follow the Captain of your salvation, who was made perfect through sufferings.
0.287	The seed of the woman shall bruise the serpent’s head.
0.288	Do not fear men. Do not be too much cast down at the deceitfulness of your hearts.
0.289	Do not fear devils; you shall gain the victory even over them.
0.290	The Lord Jesus has pledged to make you more than conquerors over all.
0.291	Plead with your Savior, plead; plead the promise in the text.
0.292	Wrestle, wrestle with God in prayer.
0.293	If it has been given to you to believe, do not fear if it should also be given to you to suffer.
0.294	Do not be terrified in any way by your adversaries; the King of the church has them all on a chain. Be kind to them, pray for them, but do not fear them.
0.295	The Lord will yet bring back his ark, though at present it is driven into the wilderness; and Satan shall fall like lightning from heaven.
0.296	Are there any enemies of God here?
0.297	The promise of the text encourages me to defy you: the seed of the woman, the ever-blessed Jesus, shall bruise the serpent’s head.
0.298	What does all your malice amount to?
0.299	You are only raging waves of the sea, foaming up your own shame.
0.300	For you, without repentance, the blackness of darkness is reserved forever.
0.301	The Lord Jesus sits in heaven, ruling over all, and causing all things to work for his children’s good; he laughs you to scorn; he holds you in the utmost derision, and therefore so will I. Who are you that persecute the children of the ever-blessed God?
0.302	Though I am only a poor youth, the Lord Jesus, the seed of the woman, will enable me to bruise your heads.
0.303	My brothers in Christ, I think I do not speak this way in my own strength, but in the strength of my Redeemer.
0.304	I know in whom I have believed; I am persuaded that he will keep safe what I have committed to him.
0.305	He who has promised that the seed of the woman shall bruise the serpent’s head is faithful.
0.306	May we all experience a daily fulfillment of this promise, both in the church and in our hearts, until we come to the church of the firstborn, the spirits of just men made perfect, in the presence and actual enjoyment of the great God our heavenly Father!
0.307	To whom, with the Son and the Holy Spirit, be ascribed all honor, power, might, majesty, and dominion, now and forevermore. Amen.
