0.1	1 Corinthians 13:8 — “Charity never fails.”
0.2	Nothing is more valuable and commendable, and yet no duty is less practiced, than that of charity.
0.3	We often pretend concern and pity for the misery and distress of our fellow creatures, yet we seldom sympathize with their condition enough to relieve them according to our abilities; but unless we assist them with what they may need, for the body as well as for the soul, all our wishes are no more than words of no value or regard, and are not to be esteemed or regarded: for when we hear of any deplorable circumstance in which our fellow creatures are involved, whether they are friends or enemies, it is our duty as Christians to assist them to the utmost of our power.
0.4	Indeed, my brethren, we are not to hurt ourselves or our families; this is not the charity that is so highly recommended by St. Paul; no, but if we are in any way able to relieve them without injuring either ourselves or our families, then it is our duty to do it; and this never fails, where it proceeds from a right end and with a right view.
0.5	St. Paul had been showing, in the preceding chapter, that spiritual gifts were diverse; that God had allotted one blessing to one and another to another; and though there was a diversity of blessings, God did not bestow them on one person, but gave to one a blessing which he denied to another, and gave a blessing or a gift to the other which might make him as eminent in one way as the other's gift made him in another: but though there are these diverse spiritual gifts, they are all given for some wise end, namely, for the profit of all, and to that end they are bestowed in these different ways.
0.6	We are not, on the one hand, to hide those gifts which God has given us; nor are we, on the other, to be so lavish with them as to spend them on our lusts and pleasures, to satisfy our sensual appetites; but they are to be used for the glory of God and the good of immortal souls.
0.7	After he had illustrated this in detail, he goes on to show that all gifts, however great they may be in themselves, are of no value unless we have charity, as you may see particularly by considering this chapter from the beginning.
0.8	But before I go any further, I shall tell you what the apostle means by charity; and that is, love; if there is true love, there will be charity; there will be an effort to assist, help, and relieve according to the ability with which God has blessed us: and since this is so highly recommended by the apostle, let us see how valuable this charity is, and how commendable in all those who pursue it. I shall,
0.9	I. Consider this blessing as it relates to the bodies of men.
0.10	II. I shall show how much more valuable it is when it relates to the souls of men.
0.11	III. I shall show you when your charity is of the right kind.
0.12	IV. Why this charity, or the grace of love, never fails.
0.13	V. I shall conclude all with an exhortation to high and low, rich and poor, one with another, to be found in the constant practice of this valuable and commendable duty.
0.14	First, I shall consider this duty as it relates to the bodies of men. And,
0.15	1. Oh, that the rich would consider how praiseworthy this duty is, in helping their fellow creatures!
0.16	We were created to be a help to each other; God has made no one so independent as not to need the assistance of another; the richest and most powerful man on the face of this earth needs the help and assistance of those who are around him; and though he may be great today, a thousand accidents may bring him as low tomorrow; he who is rolling in plenty today may be in as much scarcity tomorrow.
0.17	If our rich men would be more charitable to their poor friends and neighbors, it would be a means of recommending them to the favor of others, if Providence should frown on them; but alas, our great men would much rather spend their money at a playhouse, at a ball, an assembly, or a masquerade, than relieve a poor, distressed servant of Jesus Christ.
0.18	They would rather spend their estates on their hawks and hounds, on their whores, and on earthly, sensual, devilish pleasures, than comfort, nourish, or relieve one of their distressed fellow creatures.
0.19	What difference is there between the king on the throne and the beggar on the dunghill, when God demands their breath?
0.20	There is no difference, my brethren, in the grave, nor will there be any on the day of judgment.
0.21	You will not be excused because you have had a great estate, a fine house, and lived in all the pleasures that earth could afford you; no, these things will be one means of your condemnation; nor will you be judged according to the size of your estate, but according to the use you have made of it.
0.22	Now you may think of nothing but your pleasures and delights, of living in ease and plenty, and never consider how many thousands of your fellow creatures would rejoice at what you are wasting and setting no value on.
0.23	Let me implore you, my rich brethren, to consider the poor of the world, and how commendable and praiseworthy it is to relieve those who are distressed.
0.24	Consider how pleasing this is to God, how delightful it is to man, and how many prayers will be offered up for your welfare by those persons whom you relieve; and let this be a reason to spare a little out of the abundance with which God has blessed you, for the relief of his poor.
0.25	He could have placed you in their low condition, and them in your high state; it is only his good pleasure that has made this difference, and shall this not make you remember your distressed fellow creatures?
0.26	Let me implore you to consider which will serve you best on the day of judgment: so much money spent at a horse race or a cockpit, at a play or a masquerade, or so much given for the relief of your fellow creatures and for the distressed members of Jesus Christ.
0.27	I implore you to consider how valuable and commendable this duty is: do not be angry at my exhorting you in this way to a duty that is so highly recommended by Jesus Christ himself and by all his apostles: I speak particularly to you, my rich brethren, to entreat you to consider those who are poor in this world, and to help them from time to time, as their need calls for it.
0.28	Consider that a curse is pronounced against the riches of those who do not do good with them in this way; namely, “Come now, you rich men, weep and howl for your miseries that shall come upon you; your riches are corrupted, your garments are moth-eaten, your gold and silver are rusted through, and the rust of them shall be a witness against you, and shall eat your flesh as though it were fire; you have heaped your treasure together for the last day.”
0.29	You see the dreadful woe pronounced against all those who hoard up the abundance of the things of this life without relieving the distress of those who are in want of them: and the apostle James also goes on to speak against those who have acquired estates by fraud, as too many have in these days.
0.30	“Behold, the wages of the laborers who have reaped down your fields, which you have kept back by fraud, cry out; and the cries of those who have reaped have entered into the ears of the Lord God of Sabaoth.
0.31	You have lived in pleasure on the earth and been wanton; you have nourished your hearts, as in the day of slaughter.”
0.32	Thus, if you go on living according to the lust of the flesh, pampering your bellies and making them a god, while the poor all around you are starving, God will make these things a witness against you, which shall be like a worm to your souls and gnaw at your consciences for all eternity; therefore, let me once more recommend charity to the bodies of men, and implore you to remember what the blessed Lord Jesus Christ has promised to those who love his members in this way, that “as they have done it to the least of his members, they have done it to him.”
0.33	I am not now speaking for myself; I am not recommending my little flock in Georgia to you; then you might say, as many wantonly do, that I wanted the money for myself; no, my brethren, I am now recommending the poor of this land to you, your poor neighbors, poor friends, yes, your poor enemies; they are the ones I am now speaking for; and when I see so many starving in the streets, and almost naked, my heart is moved with pity and concern to consider that many who have it in their power to lend a helping hand should shut up their hearts of compassion, and will not relieve their fellow creatures, though they are in the most deplorable condition for want of it.
0.34	As I have thus recommended charity particularly to the rich among you, so now I would,
0.35	2. Secondly, recommend this to another group of people among us, who, instead of being the most forward in acts of charity, are commonly the most backward; I mean the clergy of this land.
0.36	Good God! How amazing is the thought that those whom God has called out to labor in spiritual things should be so backward in this duty, as fatal experience teaches.
0.37	Our clergy (that is, the majority of them) are only seeking after preferment, running up and down to obtain one benefice after another, and to heap up an estate, either to spend on the pleasures of life or to gratify their sensual appetites, while the poor of their flock are forgotten; no, worse, they are scorned, hated, and disdained.
0.38	I am not now, my brethren, speaking of all the clergy; no, blessed be God, there are some among them who abhor such proceedings and are willing to relieve the needy; but God knows these are only very few, while many take no thought of the poor among them.
0.39	They can visit the rich and the great, but they cannot bear the poor in their sight; they are forgetful, willfully forgetful, of the poor members of Jesus Christ.
0.40	They have left the old paths and turned into a new, polite way, but one which is not warranted in the word of God: they have sunk into a fine way of acting; but fine as it is, it was not the practice of the apostles, or of the Christians in any age of the church: for they visited and relieved the poor among them; but how rare is this among us, how seldom do we find charity in a clergyman?
0.41	It is with grief that I speak these things, but woeful experience is a witness to their truth: and if all the clergy of this land were here, I would tell them boldly that they did not keep to the ways of charity, but were remiss in their duty; instead of “selling all and giving to the poor,” they will not sell anything, nor give anything at all to the poor.
0.42	3. Thirdly, I would exhort you who are poor to be charitable to one another.
0.43	Though you may not have money, or the things of this life, to give to one another, yet you may assist them by comforting them and advising them not to be discouraged, though they are low in the world; or in sickness you may help them as you have time or ability: do not be unkind to one another: do not grieve, or vex, or be angry with each other; for this is giving the world an advantage over you.
0.44	And if God stirs up anyone to relieve you, do not make a bad use of what his providence has bestowed on you by the hands of some Christian: be always humble and wait on God; do not murmur or complain if you see others relieved and you are not; still wait on the Lord, and help one another, according to your abilities, from time to time.
0.45	Having shown you how valuable this is to the bodies of men, I now proceed,
0.46	Secondly, to show you how much more valuable this charity is when it extends to the souls of men.
0.47	And is not the soul more valuable than the body?
0.48	It would be of no advantage, but an infinite disadvantage, to gain the whole world if we were to lose our souls.
0.49	The soul is of infinite value and of infinite concern, and therefore we should extend our charity whenever we see it needed, and should likewise reprove, rebuke, and exhort with all godliness and love.
0.50	We should, my dear brethren, use all means and opportunities for the salvation of our own souls and of the souls of others.
0.51	We may have a great deal of charity and concern for the bodies of our fellow creatures when we have no thought or concern for their immortal souls: but oh, how sad it is to have thought for the mortal but not for the immortal part; to have charity for the body of our fellow creatures while we have no concern for their immortal souls; it may be that we help them toward their ruin, but have no concern for their salvation.
0.52	You may love to spend a merry evening, or go to a play or a horse race, with them; but on the other hand, you cannot bear the thought of going to a sermon or a religious society with them; no, you would sing the songs of the drunkard with them, but you will not sing hymns with them; this is not polite enough, this is unbecoming a gentleman of taste, unfashionable, and practiced only among a pack of fanatics and madmen.
0.53	Thus you will be so uncharitable as to join hand in hand with those who are hurrying to their own damnation, while you will not be so charitable as to help them be brought from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to God.
0.54	But this, this, my dear brethren, is the greatest charity there can be, to save a soul from death: this is of far greater advantage than relieving the body of a fellow creature: for as to the most miserable object that could be, death would deliver it from everything.
0.55	But death, to those who are not born again, would be so far from being a release from all misery that it would be an entrance into all torment, and that for all eternity.
0.56	Therefore we should do all we possibly can to keep a soul from falling into the hands of Satan: for he is the great enemy of souls.
0.57	How much should this stir you to watch over your own souls and the souls of others?
0.58	For unless you are earnest with God, Satan will be too strong for you.
0.59	Surely it is the greatest charity to watch over one another's words and actions, so that we may warn each other beforehand when danger is near, or when the enemy of souls approaches.
0.60	And if you have once known the value of your own souls, and know what it is to be snatched like brands out of the burning fire, you will be eager that others may be brought out of the same state.
0.61	It is not the leading of a moral life, being honest, and paying every man his just due; this is not a proof of your being in a state of grace, or of being born again and renewed in the spirit of your minds: no, you may die honest, just, charitable, and yet not be in a state of salvation.
0.62	It is not the preaching of that morality which most of our pulpits now bring forth that is sufficient to bring you from sin to God.
0.63	I saw you willing to learn, and yet ignorant of the necessity of being born again, regenerated, of having all old things done away and all things becoming new in your souls: I could not bear, my brethren, to see you on the highway to destruction, with no one to bring you back.
0.64	It was love for your souls, it was a desire to see Christ formed in you, that brought me into the fields, the highways, and hedges, to preach Jesus to you, a crucified Jesus, dying for you.
0.65	It was charity, indeed it was charity to your souls, that has exposed me to the present ill treatment from my letter-learned brethren.
0.66	Therefore, let me advise you to be charitable to one another's souls; that is, by advising them with all love and tenderness to follow after Christ and the things which belong to their immortal peace, before they are forever hidden from their eyes.
0.67	I now proceed, in the third place, to show when your charity is of the right kind.
0.68	And here, my brethren, I shall show, first, when it is not; and secondly, when it is of the right kind.
0.69	1. First, your charity is not of the right kind when it proceeds from worldly views or ends.
0.70	If it is to be seen by men, to receive any advantage from them, to be esteemed, or to gain a reputation in the world; or if you take any pride in it, and expect to reap benefit from God merely for it; if all or any of these is the end of your charity, then it is all in vain; your charity does not proceed from a right end, but you are thereby deceiving your own souls.
0.71	If you give alms purely to be observed by men, or expecting favor from God merely on account of it, then you do not have the glory of God or the benefit of your fellow creatures at heart, but merely yourself: this, this is not charity. Nor,
0.72	Secondly, is it true charity when we give anything to our fellow creatures purely to indulge them in vice: this is so far from being charity that it is a sin, both against God and against our fellow creatures.
0.73	And yet it is as common as it is sinful to take our friends, under a specious pretense of charity, to one entertainment or another, with no other aim than to make them guilty of excess.
0.74	By this you are guilty of a double sin: we are not to sin ourselves, much less should we try to make another sin as well. But,
0.75	Thirdly, our charity comes from a right end when it proceeds from love to God, and for the welfare of both the body and soul of our fellow creatures.
0.76	When this is the sole end of relieving our distressed fellow creatures, then our charity comes from a right end, and we may expect to reap benefit from it: this is the charity which is pleasing to God.
0.77	God is well pleased when all our actions proceed from love, love to himself and love to immortal souls.
0.78	Consider, my dear brethren, that it was love for souls that brought the blessed Jesus down from the bosom of his Father; that made him, who was equal in power and glory, come and take our nature upon himself; that caused the Lord of life to die the painful, ignominious, and accursed death of the cross.
0.79	It was love for immortal souls that brought this blessed Jesus among us.
0.80	And oh, that we might consider from this how great the value of souls was and is: it was this that made Jesus bleed, pant, and die.
0.81	And surely souls must be of infinite worth, which made the Lamb of God die so shameful a death.
0.82	And shall this not make you truly value souls?
0.83	The soul is of the greatest worth: and this, this is the greatest charity, when it comes from love to God and from love to souls.
0.84	This will be a charity whose satisfaction will last for all eternity.
0.85	Oh, that this may give you so much regard for the value of souls that you will not neglect any opportunity of doing them good: here is something worth having charity for, because they remain for all eternity.
0.86	Therefore, let me earnestly implore you both to consider the worth of immortal souls and to let your charity extend to them, so that by your advice and admonition you may be an instrument in the hands of God in bringing souls to the Lord Jesus.
0.87	I am next to consider, fourthly, why this charity, or grace of love, never fails.
0.88	And it never fails in that it proceeds from an unchangeable God.
0.89	We are not to understand that our charity is always the same: no, there may be, and frequently are, ebbs and flows; but still it never fails completely: no, the grace of love remains forever.
0.90	There is, and will be, a charity toward all who have erred and gone astray from God.
0.91	We cannot be at ease seeing souls on the highway to destruction without using our utmost endeavor to bring them back from sin and to show them the dreadful consequence of running into evil.
0.92	Christians cannot bear to see those souls for whom Christ died perish for lack of knowledge: and if they see the bodies of any of their fellow creatures in want, they will do the utmost in their power to relieve them.
0.93	Charity will never fail among those who have a true love for the Lord Jesus and know the value of souls: they will be charitable to those who are in distress.
0.94	And so you see that true charity, if it proceeds from a right end, never fails.
0.95	I now proceed, my brethren, in the last place, to exhort all of you, high and low, rich and poor, one with another, to practice this valuable and commendable duty of charity.
0.96	It is not rolling along in your coaches, taking your pleasure, and not considering the miseries of your fellow creatures, that is commendable or praiseworthy; but relieving your distressed, poor fellow creatures is valuable and praiseworthy wherever it is found.
0.97	But alas! how very few of our fashionable and polite gentlemen consider their poor friends; rather, they despise them and do not regard them.
0.98	They can indulge themselves in the follies of life, and would much rather spend their estates on lusts and pleasures, while the poor all around them are not thought worthy to be set with the dogs of their flock.
0.99	If you have an abundance of the things of this world, then you are esteemed as a companion for the polite and fashionable in life; but if you are poor, then you must not expect to find any favor, but to be hated, or not thought fit for company or conversation: and if you have an abundance of the things of this life, and do not need any assistance, then you have many ready to help you.
0.100	My dear brethren, I do not doubt that your own experience is a proof of what I assert; as also that, if anyone comes into distress, then those who promised to give relief quite forget what they promised, and will despise him, because Providence has frowned.
0.101	But this is not acting like those who are bound for the heavenly Jerusalem; thus our hearts and our actions give the lie to our lips: for if we profess the name of Christ and do not depart from all iniquity, we are not those who are worthy of being esteemed Christians indeed.
0.102	For if we do not have charity, we are not Christians: charity is the great duty of Christians: and where is our Christianity if we lack charity?
0.103	Therefore, let me implore you to exercise charity toward your distressed fellow creatures.
0.104	Indeed, my dear brethren, this is truly commendable, truly valuable; and therefore I implore you, with hearts of tender mercy toward Christ, to consider his poor, distressed members; exercise, exercise, I implore you, this charity: if you have no compassion, you are not true disciples of the Lord Jesus Christ.
0.105	I humbly beg you to consider those who need relief and are truly destitute, and to relieve them according to your abilities.
0.106	Consider that the more favorable Providence has been to you, the more earnest and eager it should make you to relieve those whom you may find in distress: it is of the utmost consequence, both what is well pleasing to your fellow creatures and the doing of your duty to God.
0.107	When you are called from here, then all riches and grandeur will be over; the grave will make no distinction; great estates will be of no significance in the other world; and if you have made a bad use of the talent which God has put into your hands, it will only aggravate your condemnation on the great day of account, when God shall come to demand your souls and to call you to account for the use to which you have put the abundance of the things of this life.
0.108	To conclude, let me once more implore each of you to act according to the circumstances of life which God, in his rich and free mercy, has given you.
0.109	If you were aware of the great consequences that would attend your acting in this charitable manner, and considered it a proof of your love to God, the loving of his members, you could not be uncharitable in your disposition, nor fail to relieve any of your distressed fellow creatures.
0.110	Consider how easy it is for many of you, by putting your mites together, to help one who is in distress; and how can you tell but that the little you give may be the means of bringing someone from distress into flourishing circumstances; and then, if there is a true Christian spirit in them, they can never be thankful enough to God the author, and to you as the instrument, for being so great a friend to them in their sad circumstances: consider also, once more, how much better your account will be on the day of judgment, and what peace of conscience you will enjoy.
0.111	How satisfying must the thought be of having relieved the widow and the fatherless?
0.112	This is recommended by the Lord Jesus Christ, and has been practiced in all ages of the church: and therefore, my brethren, be found now in the practice of this duty.
0.113	I have spoken at greater length on this because our enemies say we deny all moral actions; but, blessed be God, they speak against us without cause: we highly value them; but we say that faith in Christ, the love of God, and being born again are of infinitely more worth; but you cannot be true Christians without having charity toward your fellow creatures, whether they are friends or enemies, if they are in distress.
0.114	And therefore exert yourselves in this duty, as the blessed Jesus has commanded: and if you have true charity, you shall live and reign with him forever.
0.115	Now to God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Spirit, be all honor, power, glory, might, majesty, and dominion, both now and forevermore. Amen.
